ID=G0039
URL=http://astro.princeton.edu/~frei/Gcat_htm/AJpaper/paper.htm
SIZE=43038
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:15:31
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<HTML>
<HEAD>
   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
   <TITLE>The Galaxy Catalog - AJ Paper</TITLE>
</HEAD>

<BODY TEXT="#000000" BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" LINK="#0000EE" VLINK="#551A8B">
&nbsp;
<CENTER><TABLE BORDER=0 CELLSPACING=0 WIDTH="720" >
<TR>
<TD WIDTH="720">&nbsp;

<p>
<b>Please NOTE: Mathematical symbols and equations are presented according
to the TeX typsetting rules here!</b>
<br>&nbsp;
<br>&nbsp;
<p>

<P>ZSOLT FREI, PURAGRA GUHATHAKURTA (1) and JAMES E. GUNN&nbsp;

<P>Department of Astrophysical Sciences&nbsp;
<BR>Princeton University, Peyton Hall&nbsp;
<BR>Princeton, NJ 08544&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;

<P>and&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;

<P>J. ANTHONY TYSON&nbsp;

<P>AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories&nbsp;
<BR>Murray Hill, NJ 07974&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;

<P>(1): Current address: UCO/Lick Observatory, University of California,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Santa Cruz, CA 95064&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>ABSTRACT&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>We present a digital catalog of images of 113 galaxies in this
paper.  These galaxies are all nearby, bright, large and well
resolved. All images were recorded with charge coupled devices (CCDs)
at the Palomar Observatory with the 1.5 meter telescope and at the
Lowell Observatory with the 1.1 meter telescope. At Palomar we used
the Thuan-Gunn g, r and i photometric bands (Thuan and Gunn, 1976) to
take 3 images each of 31 spiral galaxies; at Lowell we used the B_{J}
and R bands (2 images per galaxy) of the photometric system by
Gullixson et al. (1995) to observe 82 spirals and ellipticals. The
galaxies were selected to span the Hubble classification classes. All
data are photometrically calibrated with foreground stars
removed. Important data on these galaxies published in the "Third
Reference Catalog of Bright Galaxies" (de Vaucouleurs et al., 1991)
are recorded in the FITS file headers. All files are available through
anonymous FTP from "astro.princeton.edu", and Princeton University
Press will soon publish the data on CD-ROM.


<P><B>1. INTRODUCTION&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>We describe a digital catalog of galaxy images.&nbsp; The direct
motivation for the development of such a catalog was the need for a
suitable data set to test the automatic galaxy classification
techniques we are currently working on (Frei, 1995a, in
preparation). Automatic means of classifying galaxies are necessary to
handle the huge amounts of imaging data that are soon to be available
from large survey projects, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (Gunn
and Knapp, 1993). We think, however, that these images are useful
beyond the scope of this project; consequently, we make the digital
images available. The catalog contains FITS files (Wells et al., 1981)
of the images, with an extensive set of corresponding information in
the file headers.

<P>To test the classification techniques, we needed a set of galaxies
that span the full range of the Hubble morphological classes. Another
requirement was to have large, well resolved galaxies so that we could
develop our techniques step-by-step: first, solve the easiest
challenges that large galaxies pose, then improve the techniques so
that they work for galaxies which are further away.&nbsp; The
performance and limitations of the classification system can be tested
on degraded images. If images of galaxies in the digital catalog are
available in several passbands then one can interpolate or extrapolate
in color, thus synthetically "redshifting" the image of a given galaxy
to any desired z (while decreasing the resolution at the same time).

<P>Consequently, we developed a catalog of images of nearby,
well&nbsp; resolved galaxies that were recorded in several passbands
with charge coupled devices (CCDs).&nbsp; Although CCDs have been in
extensive use for about 15 years, there is no similar data set
publicly available which we know of.

<P>Early photometric surveys of galaxies date back to the
70's. Freeman (1970) collected surface photometric data for 36 spiral
and lenticular galaxies to examine the disks.&nbsp; Kormendy (1977a,
1977b, 1977c) used photoelectric photometry to study a total of 20 red
and neutral compact galaxies.&nbsp; King (1978) performed photographic
surface photometry on 17 galaxies, mostly giant ellipticals, to
compare the brightness profiles of giant ellipticals to those of star
clusters in his famous study (King, 1962, 1965, 1966). Burstein
(1979a, 1979b) investigated 18 S0 galaxies. He also used photographic
surface photometry to explore the luminosity profiles and the origin
of S0 galaxies Boroson (1981) derived luminosity profiles from
photographic photometry of 26 spiral galaxies.

<P>Kent (1984, 1985) did CCD surface photometry of field galaxies. His
set contains 105 galaxies of different, widely distributed
morphological types. These are not the largest galaxies on the sky; in
fact, we found only three common between galaxies in his set and our
set of 113 nearby galaxies. His aim in observing field galaxies was,
among other things, to compare statistics of field galaxies to
statistics of disk galaxies in clusters.&nbsp; Using the photometric
data he calculated bulge-to-disk ratios based on intensity profiles
along the major and minor axes.

<P>Other recent works on nearby galaxies with CCDs include Davis et
al. (1985), who studied three well known elliptical galaxies in
detail.&nbsp; Lauer (1985) had a larger sample of 42 galaxies,
ellipticals and S0s, which allowed him to do systematic studies of
central structures and core properties.&nbsp; Simien and de
Vaucouleurs (1986) compiled a large data set to investigate
bulge-to-disk ratios of spirals and lenticulars. Their data included
98 galaxies, 32 of which were observed by them.&nbsp; Other data came
from works mentioned above (Boroson, 1981; Burstein, 1979b; Kormendy,
1977b) and from two others (Yoshizawa and Wakamatsu, 1975; Whitmore
and Kirshner, 1981); not all of these images were taken with CCDs.

<P>Watanabe et al. (1982), Watanabe (1983), Okamura et al. (1984) and
Watanabe et al. (1985) studied more than 200 galaxies to develop a
quantitative classification system. They used plates and digitized
them with an isophotometer which used a one dimensional CCD as a
detector.&nbsp; The culmination of their effort is the "Photometric
Atlas of Northern Bright Galaxies" (Kodaira et al., 1990). This book
contains digitized images of 791 galaxies.&nbsp; Unfortunately, these
data are available in a printed form only, and since the images are
digitized from photographic plates, all problems presented by those
plates (nonlinearity, for example) are incorporated into the digital
form of the data.&nbsp; More recently, Han (1992) presented CCD
surface photometry of spirals (284 galaxies in 16 clusters) and
Colless et al. (1993) studied ellipticals and lenticulars (352
galaxies in distant clusters). However, the galaxies in the last two
studies are too distant for the purposes of developing and testing our
automated classification system.

<P>There are other catalogs with images of galaxies, all of which
are&nbsp; printed from photographic plates (Sandage, 1961; Sandage and
Bedke, 1988). Also worth mentioning are those efforts that resulted in
a large collection of useful photometric data on galaxies, but which
do not contain images (Sandage and Tammann, 1981; Tully and Fisher,
1987; de Vaucouleurs et al., 1991).

<P>Images of the galaxies in our catalog were obtained at two
different sites. At the Lowell Observatory, we used the 1.1 meter
telescope and a CCD camera. The photometric system is described in
Gullixson et al. (1995). We used two filters, B_{J} and R.&nbsp; About
25% of our images were observed at the Palomar Observatory with the
1.5 meter telescope equipped with a CCD camera and the Thuan-Gunn
photometric system (Thuan and Gunn, 1976). We used three passbands: g,
r, and i.

<P>An unusual feature of our catalog is that foreground stars have
been removed from the frames. This has been done for several reasons:
to derive quantitative parameters that describe the galaxy for the
purposes of classification, we had to ensure that the foreground
objects did not contribute to these parameters. Secondly, to
synthetically "redshift" the images of these galaxies, the images had
to be free of foreground stars. We think that star-removal will also
be useful for other possible applications of this catalog.

<P>In the next section, we describe the observations. Section 3
contains details of the processing of the images. In Section 4, we
tabulate and plot distributions of parameters of the galaxies in the
catalog, and in Section 5 we describe the image file format and the
information contained in the file headers.&nbsp; In the short
discussion in Section 6, we give details on how to access the data
through the computer network.  
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>2. OBSERVATIONS&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>2.1 Palomar&nbsp;

<P>Thirty-one galaxies were observed with the 1.5 meter telescope
(P60) of Palomar Observatory on the night of 1991 May 4 with the Wide
Field Prime Focus Universal Extragalactic Instrument (Wide Field
PFUEI).  Gunn and Westphal (1981) describe the original PFUEI,
designed for the 5 meter telescope (P200) at Palomar. The wide field
camera has a 306 mm f/4 aerial camera lens collimator and a Nikon 58
mm f/1.2 camera lens. The field of view is 16' x 16', and it is
projected on an 800 x 800 Texas Instruments (TI) CCD in the Cassegrain
focus, yielding a scale of 1.19 arcsec per pixel. The focal ratio of
the system is f/1.65 (for more details see Hester and Kulkarni, 1989).

<P>Images were obtained in the g, r and i bands of the Thuan-Gunn
photometric system. The original, 4-band system (u, v, g and r) was
introduced by Thuan and Gunn (1976). It was later extended by Wade et
al.&nbsp; (1979) with the i band, and by Schneider et al. (1983) with
the z band. Most CCDs are not efficient in the z band, but g, r and i
CCD surface photometry of galaxies have been extensively done in the
past decade. These filters are centered at 500, 650 and 820 nm,
respectively. See Frei and Gunn (1994) for a detailed description of
the photometric system we used, including the system response curves
(including the effects of atmospheric absorption, two reflections from
aluminum, the transmission functions of filters and optics, and the
quantum efficiency of the detector).&nbsp; The filters were placed in
front of the camera optics to avoid problems with reflection.

<P>All exposures were 60 s. The 9 electron CCD readout noise was low
enough to allow such a short exposure time and still ensure that the
background was sky noise limited. The gain (G) of the instrument is
about 2 electrons/ADU (analog-to-digital units). The effective noise
in electrons (sigma_{e}) is the quadratic sum of the readout noise and
the sky noise (the latter, ideally, being the square root of the
signal in electrons in a given pixel):

<P>(1)&nbsp;&nbsp; sigma_{e} = \sqrt{ R^{2} + N G },&nbsp;

<P>where R is the readout noise in electrons and N is the counts in
ADU in a given pixel.&nbsp; With 60 s exposure time, the level of the
sky was typically around 900, 1300 and 2200 counts in the g, r and i
bands, respectively. Using (1) it is obvious that the readout noise is
negligible, and signals at the sky level are background noise limited.
Typical counts around the center of galaxies are 10000-20000 ADU,
making the readout noise even less significant there. The sky noise
that is actually measured off the galaxy in the images is slightly
higher than sigma_{e} suggested by (1) due to imperfections in flat
fielding and the presence of faint objects and cosmic ray events in
the region where the noise is measured.

<P>Keeping the exposure time short for all the observations made it
possible to obtain more than 150 images (including flats and standard
star observations) in one night. The centers of some of our brightest
galaxies, however, are saturated. Saturation was limited to only few
pixels around the photometric center of these galaxies. We introduced
a scheme to repair these regions and to calibrate these galaxies (see
the next section).

<P>2.2 Lowell&nbsp;

<P>Eighty two galaxies were observed with the 1.1 meter telescope of
the Lowell Observatory on several nights between 1989 March 24 and
April 4.&nbsp; A camera with a thinned, back-illuminated 320 x 512
pixel RCA CCD was in the Cassegrain focus. A 2:1 focal reducer gave an
f/4 focal ratio, yielding a scale of 1.35 arcsec per pixel. The field
of view is about 7' x 11'. For more details, see Guhathakurta and
Tyson (1989).

<P>We used the three-band B_{J}, R and I photometric system, which was
introduced to take advantage of silicon CCDs (Gullixson et al.,
1995). Only B_{J} and R images were obtained of each galaxy.&nbsp;
These filters are centered at 450 and 650 nm. Frei and Gunn (1994)
give system response curves representing the system as we used it.

<P>Typical exposure times were between 100 and 600 s, depending on the
galaxy core brightness. This yielded sky levels between 100 and 1000
counts (the sky in the R band being typically twice as high as in the
B_{J} band for identical exposure times).&nbsp; Short test exposures
were& first obtained of each galaxy in each filter in order to avoid
nuclear saturation.&nbsp; The readout noise of the CCD was 90
electron, and the& gain of the instrument was 11 electron/ADU. From
(1) we conclude that in the background the readout noise and the sky
noise are about& equally important. Typical counts in central regions
of the galaxies& reach above 10000 ADU, so there the shot noise
dominates over the& readout noise.

<P>Both observing runs took place in spring. Since we tried to avoid
galaxies close to the Galactic equator, all the galaxies are located
in the Northern Galactic cap. The positions of the galaxies in the
catalog are plotted in Figure 1 in equatorial coordinates. We used a
Hammer-Aitoff projection which produces an equal area map of the
entire sky. The Galactic plane is shown with a thick curve for
orientation. The CCD images are oriented such that North is up, and
East is to the left.

<BR><IMG SRC="figure1.gif" HSPACE=10 VSPACE=20 HEIGHT=526 WIDTH=692>&nbsp;
<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=-1>&nbsp;Figure 1.</FONT></B><FONT SIZE=-1>&nbsp;
Positions of the 113 galaxies in the catalog on the sky. An&nbsp;</FONT>&nbsp;</CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>equal-area Hammer-Aitoff projection was used.&nbsp;
The center is at 12h RA&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>and 0 deg. declination.&nbsp; The Galactic plane
is shown with the thick&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>curve. All galaxies are around the Northern Galactic
cap, and avoid&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>the Galactic plane.&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>
&nbsp;

<P><B>3. DATA PROCESSING</B>&nbsp;

<P>Debiasing and flat fielding the images of galaxies observed at
Palomar was straightforward.&nbsp; We used the data in the extended
horizontal register of the CCD to obtain the bias level, which was
subtracted from the image. Twilight sky flats were obtained in all
three passbands during the night of observations. These were used to
create a median flat which was used to flat field the images.

<P>Besides subtracting the bias level, we had to use a more
complicated flattening procedure for the images observed at
Lowell.&nbsp; Because of the glass substrate of the RCA CCD, the night
sky emission lines caused Fabry-Perot fringing in the R band (B_{J} is
not affected since there are no strong atmospheric emission lines in
this band). Because of fringing, we treated the R and the B_{J} images
differently.  Another problem was that observations took place in both
bright and dark conditions, since the observing run was longer than a
week. The color of the background sky is close to the color of the
twilight flat in bright conditions, but is quite different when the
Moon is down. Consequently, we handled images taken in bright and dark
conditions differently. Some of the techniques we used were developed
by Tyson (1986).

<P>For the B_{J} images, if the background was bright, we divided by a
twilight flat. Because the colors are similar, this was sufficient to
obtain good results. If the sky was dark, after dividing by the
twilight flat we also subtracted a carefully scaled twilight flat to
account for the color difference.&nbsp; For the R frames, where the
fringing amplitude can be as large as 15% of the night sky level, in
addition to the steps performed for the B_{J} frames, we also
subtracted a scaled "fringe frame".&nbsp; Twilight flats have a much
lower fringe amplitude than even the bright sky images. We scaled the
fringe frame to remove fringes as best we could from the twilight
flat, then used it to flat-field the object exposures.&nbsp; We
constructed the fringe frame by imaging relatively sparse parts of the
sky for 300 s at least five times each night, and by averaging these
frames by median filtering to minimize contributions from individual
stars and galaxies.

<P>3.1 Nuclear Saturation in Palomar Images&nbsp;

<P>A few pixels around the photometric centers of some of the galaxies
observed at Palomar were saturated. Compared to the total area of the
fields, only a very small portion of the images were affected,
accounting for only a negligible part of the total light of the
galaxy. We modeled the light distribution around the photometric
centers - L(x,y) - with a seven-parameter, two dimensional Gaussian
distribution of the form:

<P>(2)&nbsp;&nbsp; L(x,y) = A + B exp[ -C_{1}(x-a)^{2} -C_{2}(y-b)^{2}
-C_{3}(x-a)(y-b) ],&nbsp;

<P>where a and b are the coordinates of the photometric center of the
given galaxy, x and y are the rectangular coordinates in the image, A,
B, C_{1}, C_{2}, and C_{3} are constants. These 5 constants and the
coordinates of the center of the galaxy are to be fitted.

<P>First, to preserve integer representation of the images, we divided
all pixel values by 2 in the entire image if the center was saturated;
in no case did this compromise the sampling of the noise
histogram. Next, we used the information in the image just around the
saturated center to fit these parameters, and then replaced all
saturated pixels with analytical values from (2). Since the few images
which are saturated were overexposed only slightly, dividing by 2 was
enough in all cases to ensure that the fitted centers are lower than
the maximum value, 32767, that can be represented by short signed
integers in the pixels. We made a clear indication whether the images
were saturated (and fixed by this method) in the file headers (see
Section 5).

<P>The fitting algorithm was the multidimensional downhill simplex
method of Nelder and Mead (1965). The actual code is adopted from
Press et al.'s (1988) amoeba routine. Crucial for the success of the
fit is the selection of sensible starting values of the parameters to
be fitted. The estimated center of the galaxy (a and b) was obtained
as a user input; the background sky level (A) and the cross-term
(C_{3}) were set to 0. The widths in x and y dimensions (C_{1} and
C_{2}) were estimated from the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of
the point spread function (PSF) representing the image.&nbsp; The peak
value (B) was set twice as high as the saturation level (32767). With
these starting values the iteration converged quickly and gave good
results.

<P>Eleven of the 31 spiral galaxies observed at Palomar were saturated
at the photometric center, eight of them in all bands, three of them
only in two bands.&nbsp; All saturated images were fitted with the
above method and their saturated pixels replaced. Different extents of
saturation in the different passbands resulted in the Gaussian
distribution being fitted to different regions of the same
galaxy.&nbsp; Because of this, colors may be unreliable in the very
central regions of these galaxies.

<P>3.2 Star Removal&nbsp;

<P>We used an empirical two dimensional PSF to fit and remove the
foreground stars from the images. The program we developed for this
purpose first identifies stars off the galaxy to be used for
constructing the PSF. Second, it finds those objects which are likely
to be foreground stars (versus HII regions, bright stars belonging to
the galaxy, etc) and removes them using a PSF fit. Third, the
residuals left in the image are repaired cosmetically. Although the
program does not perform all necessary steps automatically, it was
very useful for the purpose of cleaning these images. Details of this
procedure are to be found in a separate paper (Frei, 1995b).

<P>On several occasions the area occupied by the galaxy was much
smaller than the total area of the original image, and we chose to
extract square regions out of the original images that contained the
galaxy, which saved a considerable amount of storage space. The CCD
chip used at Lowell was not square, making it necessary to trim to
obtain square images.&nbsp; We decided to construct the catalog using
only square images of a few standard sizes. Offsets (the coordinates
of the lower left corner of the trimmed image in the original image)
and the coordinates of the photometric center of the galaxies in the
final, clipped images were recorded in the file headers (see Section
5).

<P>We also calibrated all the galaxies photometrically, but not
without difficulty.&nbsp; Conditions during several nights of
observations at Lowell, and part of the observing night at Palomar
were non-photometric. Moreover, observations of standard stars were
not available for all nights at Lowell. In a separate paper (Frei and
Gunn, 1994), we derived transformation relations for colors of
galaxies among five different photometric systems. These were used to
calculate magnitudes in the given filter systems from data available
in the Third Reference Catalog of Bright Galaxies (de Vaucouleurs et
al., 1991, RC3).&nbsp; For those data from Palomar, both the
calculated magnitudes and the magnitudes obtained from
standard-star-calibrations are given in the file headers (there were
seven standard stars observed during the night of observations).&nbsp;
The Lowell data contain only magnitudes calculated via color
transformations of the RC3 data.

<P>We summed up total counts corresponding to the galaxy in a circle
centered on the photometric center of the galaxy (the x and y
coordinates of which is recorded in the file header). The radius of
this circle was half of the horizontal (or vertical, since all images
are square) size of the image (which is also recorded in the file
header). This aperture is large enough to effectively make our
magnitude the total magnitude of the galaxy. We subtracted the
contribution of the sky using the total area of the circle and the sky
level recorded in the file header. If the photometric center of the
galaxy does not coincide with the center of the image, we used only
the part of the circle which is inside the image for the sum, and
calculated the area of this part for correct sky subtraction. With all
the necessary information available from the FITS header keys, these
steps can be reproduced with ease.&nbsp; Starting from this total
count representing the galaxy, and the calibrated magnitude in the
given band (derived via color transformation of RC3 data), we obtained
the count which would represent 0 magnitude in a pixel; this is stored
in the file header.
<BR>&nbsp;

<P>4<B>. PROPERTIES OF GALAXIES IN THE CATALOG&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>All of the galaxies in our catalog are listed in RC3. We recorded
some of the properties found in RC3 for these galaxies in the file
headers (such as morphological type, total B magnitude, B-V color,
etc). Here we present distributions of some of the most important
properties, to statistically describe the catalog.&nbsp; In the next
section, we will give detailed information about all the parameters
included in the file headers. Although we developed techniques - some
of them new - to derive similar properties and to automatically
process the images for classification, the aim of this paper is to
report the data, not our reduction technique. Thus we chose to present
parameters from RC3, a well known source. We will present the
properties we obtained with our methods for these galaxies elsewhere
(Frei, 1995a, in preparation).

<P>The revised morphological type on the "Handbuch der Physik" system
is used in RC3 (de Vaucouleurs, 1959, 1963; de Vaucouleurs et al.,
1991).  The histogram of the numerical type T of the galaxies in our
catalog is in Fig. 2. Among the 113 galaxies, one is of type I0
(non-Magellanic irregular). The numerical type (T) is 90 for this
galaxy in RC3.&nbsp; We omitted this galaxy from the histogram.&nbsp;
The distribution of morphological types is well suited to our
classification task. We have many more spirals than ellipticals.
Deriving parameters of spirals (based on the fine structure in the
disk) is more complicated than finding representative parameters of
ellipticals (where fine structure, although well studied, is not
usually considered for classification purposes).

<P><IMG SRC="figure2.gif" HEIGHT=542 WIDTH=643>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 2.</B>&nbsp; Distribution of the numerical
morphological types T of the&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>galaxies in the catalog. T is obtained from RC3 for
all the&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>galaxies. Types -5 and -4 are ellipticals, -3 to
-1 are lenticulars, 0&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>to 9 are spirals and the rest are irregulars.&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<P>Total B_{T} magnitudes are derived from photoelectric aperture
photometry and from surface photometry in RC3. The histogram in Fig. 3
shows the distribution of this parameter.&nbsp; Although we calibrated
our images in their respective bands, there is not a single band in
which observations are available for all the galaxies (we used
different photometric systems at Palomar and at Lowell). Consequently,
the easiest way to compare brightnesses is to use data from RC3.

<P><IMG SRC="figure3.gif" HEIGHT=523 WIDTH=644>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 3.</B>&nbsp; Distribution of the total
B_{T} magnitudes of the galaxies&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>in the catalog. B_{T} is from RC3 for all the galaxies.&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<P>As a rough measure of the distances of the galaxies, we plotted the
histogram of the heliocentric radial velocities ( &lt;v>_{hc} ) in
Fig. 4. RC3 has four radial velocities in Column 10. HI line (Row 1)
and optical (Row 2) heliocentric radial velocities are first given,
and then they are combined (weighted mean) and corrected to the
Galactic Center (Row 3) and to the reference frame of the microwave
background radiation (Row 4).&nbsp; Since we wanted the weighted mean
of the HI line and optical heliocentric radial velocities, we
calculated them from the data in Line 4, using formula (82) in RC3.

<P><IMG SRC="figure4.gif" HEIGHT=523 WIDTH=635>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 4.</B>&nbsp; Distribution of the weighted
mean heliocentric radial&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>velocities of the galaxies in the catalog. &lt;v>_{hc}
is calculated from&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>data found in RC3 for all the galaxies.&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<P>Isophotal major axis diameters (D_{25}) listed in RC3 were obtained
from photographic and CCD surface photometry and from photoelectric
growth curves.&nbsp; We produced a histogram of these sizes in Fig. 5,
where the diameters are expressed in arcseconds. The majority of our
galaxies are 4-6 arcmin in diameter, some of them even larger; our
catalog contains some of the brightest, largest, most nearby galaxies
around the Northern Galactic cap.

<P><IMG SRC="figure5.gif" HEIGHT=531 WIDTH=627>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 5.&nbsp;</B> Major axis isophotal diameters
of the galaxies in the</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>catalog. These diameters, at a surface brightness
level mu_{B} = 25</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>mag arcsec^{-2}, are found in RC3 for all the galaxies.</FONT></CENTER>

<P>RC3 lists isophotal axis ratios for the galaxies, both ellipticals
and spirals. We calculated inclination angles (I) from these data
according to

<P>(3)&nbsp;&nbsp; I = 1 / cos( 10^{-R_{25}} ) ,&nbsp;

<P>where R_{25} is the decimal logarithm of the axis ratio (as it is
actually given in RC3, obtained at an isophotal surface brightness
level mu_{B}=25 mag arcsec^{-2}). As usual, 0 deg.&nbsp; represents
face-on galaxies, while 90 deg. corresponds to edge-on
orientation.&nbsp; We plotted a histogram of the inclination angles
for our spiral and lenticular galaxies (99 in total) in Fig. 6, since
the axis isophotal ratio is not directly related to an inclination
angle for ellipticals.  The apparent lack of face-on galaxies is
understandable since spiral galaxies, even if face-on, will have
non-circular isophotes at any brightness level due to the uneven
surface brightness distribution of light in the disk (spiral
arms).&nbsp; Edge-on, or almost edge-on galaxies will have isophotes
which appear "fatter" than the orientation of the disk would indicate,
due to finite disk thickness and due to the presence of the
bulge. This will result in the measured inclination angle (from (3))
being somewhat (systematically) larger than the "true" disk
inclination.

<P><IMG SRC="figure6.gif" HEIGHT=529 WIDTH=623>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 6.</B>&nbsp; Distribution of inclination
angles of the spiral,&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>lenticular and irregular galaxies in the catalog.
The data are found&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>in RC3 for all the galaxies. The apparent lack of
face-on and edge-on&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>galaxies are due to the techniques used to determine
the inclination&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>angles. See Section 4 of the text for an explanation.&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>


<P>In Fig. 7 we plot the distribution of position angles.&nbsp; The
standard convention for measuring position angles is from the North
eastward between 0 deg. and 180 deg., as it is given in RC3.&nbsp; It
is reassuring that they are evenly distributed (there is no
unreasonable selection effect in our catalog). Position angles for
those galaxies with inclination angles less than approx. 40 deg. were
set to 0 in RC3. We have 12 such galaxies in our catalog, and they are
omitted from Fig. 7.

<P><IMG SRC="figure7.gif" HEIGHT=531 WIDTH=631>&nbsp;
<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1><B>Figure 7.</B>&nbsp; Distribution of position angles
of all galaxies in the&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>catalog. All data are from RC3. Twelve nearly face-on
spiral galaxies&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>were omitted from the first bin, since they have
ill-defined position&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<CENTER><FONT SIZE=-1>angles (set to 0 in RC3).&nbsp;</FONT></CENTER>

<P>Some of the most important properties of the galaxies are given in
<A HREF="table1.txt">Table 1. </A>The first column is the NGC number
of the catalog galaxy.  The observatory where the images were obtained
is identified in column 2. All Palomar galaxies are in three bands
(three separate images are available, in g, r and i), while all Lowell
galaxies are in two bands (two images, in B_{J} and R).&nbsp; The
numerical revised morphological type T from RC3 is in column 3; these
data are used to construct the histogram in Fig. 2.&nbsp; Columns 4
and 5 are right ascensions and declinations as recorded in the file
headers at the time of observations. Columns 6 to 10 are the total
B_{T} magnitudes, heliocentric mean radial velocities ( &lt;v>_{hc} ),
major axis isophotal diameters (D_{25}), inclination angles, and
position angles, respectively. These data are all from RC3, and they
were used for Figs. 3-7.
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>5.FITS HEADER KEYS&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>We recorded useful information in the header keys in the FITS files
of the images. There are several keys among those we used which are
standard FITS keys (for the description of the FITS format and the
standard keys see Wells et al., 1981; or "Definition of the Flexible
Image Transport System (FITS)", from NOST). The standard keys - those
mentioned in Wells et al. - that we populated with data are: SIMPLE,
BITPIX, NAXIS, NAXIS1, NAXIS2, BSCALE, BZERO, BUNIT, OBJECT, DATE,
DATE-OBS, INSTRUME, TELESCOP, OBSERVER, HISTORY, CRVALn, CRPIXn,
CDELTn, CTYPEn, DATAMAX, DATAMIN and EQUINOX (formerly, like in Wells
et al., EPOCH).

<P>There are several keys that we added to describe the data as best
as we could. All necessary information is in <A
HREF="table2.txt">Table 2.</A> The first column contains the name of
the header key, the second column has the type of the variable, and
the last column gives a short description.&nbsp; The first six keys
(EXPOSURE to TIME) were recorded during the observations.&nbsp; We
obtained PSF_FWHM} from the data at the time of foreground star
removal, and SKY and SKYSIG at the time of calibration (the sky level
is the median of all pixels in the image).&nbsp; The photometric
zeropoints DNAT0_ST and DNAT0_BV are calculated from observations of
standard stars (not available for the Lowell data) aand by using data
from RC3, respectively. We recorded the photometric center of the
galaxy in the trimmed, square image (G_CENT_X and G_CENT_Y).&nbsp; The
parameter SATURATE is used to tell whether the galaxy center was
saturated and repaired.&nbsp; The last seven header keys (B_RC3 to
VELO_RC3) are populated with data from RC3. These are well described
in RC3 and in the previous section. We gave the location (column and
line) of the actual data entry in the RC3 table.
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>6. CONCLUSION</B>&nbsp;

<P>During 1989-1990, a substantial set of CCD surface photometry of
nearby, well resolved galaxies were collected from Palomar and
Lowell. The data were used to construct a catalog of images in FITS
format, containing a uniform set of information in the file headers.
The catalog is suitable for our ongoing galaxy classification project
(Frei, 1995a, in preparation), and we believe it can also be used for
other purposes. We collected and presented information about the
observations and various data processing steps in the previous
sections. The description of FITS header keys and brief statistics of
key properties of the catalog galaxies are also included to aid the
prospective user of these data.

<P>To our knowledge, no data similar to that presented here are
available to the general public today. Although we plan to increase
the number of galaxies in the catalog, we think that the current set
of images is already useful for various applications, and thus it
should be made accessible to anyone interested. The image files are on
our "anonymous" FTP site at "astro.princeton.edu". The data are in
"frei/Galaxies".&nbsp; Additional information is in the README file in
the same directory.&nbsp; Simple computer-readable versions of Tables
1 and 2 are also available through FTP.&nbsp; We constructed a "home
page" for this galaxy catalog on the World Wide Web (WWW) at URL
"http://astro.princeton.edu/~frei/galaxy_catalog.html".&nbsp; The copy
of this paper and the tables, separately, can be found there along
with all FITS data. We also converted images to GIF format, and placed
short separate text files with header information in the archives.
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>It is our pleasure to acknowledge the great number of people who
participated in the observations and data reductions in the past 5
years. Their work made it possible to construct the catalog as
presented here (we obviously try to avoid saying "to complete", since
such a large set of data can be improved and extended almost
indefinitely). Students at the Department of Astrophysical Sciences,
Princeton University, did observations at Lowell as part of a student
project. We thank Jill Knapp for organizing the project. We are
indebted to several people at Lowell: Jay Gallagher, who made it
possible to use the observatory for the project, Craig Gullixson, who
helped with the telescope, Neal Hartsough (University of Arizona) and
Rick Wenk (AT&amp;T Bell Labs) who built the software system.&nbsp; We
are greatly indebted to the former students who took part in the data
acquisition and reduction: Arif Babul, Renyue Cen, Charles Gammie, Bin
Gao, Lynne Hillenbrand, Neil Katz, Man Hoi Lee, Joanna Lees, Kevin
Long, Shude Mao, Jordi Miralda-Escude, Changbom Park, Duncan Walsh and
David Weinberg.&nbsp; We acknowledge very useful discussions with
Robert Lupton and Neil Tyson, who also helped to revise the
manuscript. The patience of the Palomar time allocation committee, who
continued to give time for this project through five completely
clouded-out years, is also much appreciated. Z. F. is indebted to
Peter Teuben (Maryland) for his help to conform with the FITS
standard.

<P>This research was supported in part by NSF through grant
no. AST-9100121.&nbsp; Z. F. acknowledges the support of OTKA through
grant no. F4491.
<BR>&nbsp;

<P><B>REFERENCES&nbsp;</B>&nbsp;

<P>Boroson, T. 1981, Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 46, 177&nbsp;

<P>Burstein, D. 1979a, Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 41, 435&nbsp;

<P>Burstein, D. 1979b, Astrophysical Journal, 234, 435&nbsp;

<P>Colless, M., Burstein, D., Wegner, G, Saglia, R. P., McMahan, R.,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Davies, R. L., Bertschinger, E., &amp; Baggley, G. 1993, Monthly
Notices&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; of the Royal Astronomical Society, 262, 475&nbsp;

<P>Davis, L. E., Cawson, M., Davies, R. L., &amp; Illingworth, G. 1985,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Astronomical Journal, 90, 169&nbsp;

<P>de Vaucouleurs, G. 1959, Handbuch der Physik, 53, 275&nbsp;

<P>de Vaucouleurs, G. 1963, Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 8, 31&nbsp;

<P>de Vaucouleurs, G., de Vaucouleurs, A., Corwin, H. G., Buta, R.,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Paturel, G., &amp; Fouque, P. 1991, Third Reference Catalog
of Bright&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Galaxies (Springer-Verlag, New York)&nbsp;

<P>Freeman, K. C. 1970, Astrophysical Journal, 160, 811&nbsp;

<P>Frei, Z. 1995a, Astrophysical Journal, to be submitted&nbsp;

<P>Frei, Z. 1995b, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Pacific, submitted&nbsp;

<P>Frei, Z., &amp; Gunn, J. E. 1994, Astronomical Journal, 108, 1476&nbsp;

<P>Guhathakurta, P., &amp; Tyson, J. A. 1989, Astrophysical Journal, 346,
773&nbsp;

<P>Gullixson, C. A., Boeshaar, P. C., Tyson, J. A., &amp; Seitzer, P. 1995,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 99, 281&nbsp;

<P>Gunn, J. E., &amp; Knapp, G. R. 1993, in Sky Surveys: Protostars to&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Protogalaxies, ASP Conference Series 43, edited by Soifer, B.
T., p. 267&nbsp;

<P>Gunn, J. E., &amp; Westphal, J. A. 1981, Proc. SPIE, 290, 16&nbsp;

<P>Han, M. 1992, Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 81, 35&nbsp;

<P>Hester, J. J., &amp; Kulkarni, S. R. 1989, Astrophysical Journal, 340,
362&nbsp;

<P>Kent, S. M. 1984, Astrophysical Journal, 56, 105&nbsp;

<P>Kent, S. M. 1985, Astrophysical Journal, 59, 115&nbsp;

<P>King, I. R. 1962, Astronomical Journal, 67, 471&nbsp;

<P>King, I. R. 1965, Astronomical Journal, 70, 376&nbsp;

<P>King, I. R. 1966, Astronomical Journal, 71, 64&nbsp;

<P>King, I. R. 1978, Astrophysical Journal, 222, 1&nbsp;

<P>Kodaira, K., Okamura, S., &amp; Ichikawa, S. 1990, Photometric Atlas
of&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Northern Bright Galaxies (University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo)&nbsp;

<P>Kormendy, J. 1977a, Astrophysical Journal, 214, 359&nbsp;

<P>Kormendy, J. 1977b, Astrophysical Journal, 217, 406&nbsp;

<P>Kormendy, J. 1977c, Astrophysical Journal, 218, 333&nbsp;

<P>Lauer, T. R. 1985, Astrophysical Journal Supplements, 57, 473&nbsp;

<P>Nelder, J. A., &amp; Mead, R. 1965, Computer Journal, 7, 308&nbsp;

<P>NOST: NASA/Science Office of Standards and Technology 1993, Definition&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; of the Flexible Image Transport System (FITS), Code 633.2 (NASA&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD)&nbsp;

<P>Okamura, S., Kodaira, K., &amp; Watanabe, M. 1984, Astrophysical Journal,
280, 7&nbsp;

<P>Press, H. W., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., &amp; Vetterling,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; W. T. 1988, Numerical Recipes in C (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge)&nbsp;

<P>Sandage, A. 1961, The Hubble Atlas of Galaxies (Carnegie Institution&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; of Washington, Washington, D. C.)&nbsp;

<P>Sandage, A., &amp; Bedke, J. 1988, Atlas of Galaxies (NASA, Washington,
D. C.)&nbsp;

<P>Sandage, A., &amp; Tammann, G. A. 1981, A Revised Shapley-Ames Catalog
of&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Bright Galaxies (Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington,
D. C.)&nbsp;

<P>Schneider, D. P., Gunn, J. E., &amp; Hoessel, J. G. 1983, Astrophysical&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Journal, 264, 337&nbsp;

<P>Simien, F., &amp; de Vaucouleurs, G. 1986, Astrophysical Journal, 302,
564&nbsp;

<P>Thuan, T. X., &amp; Gunn, J. E. 1976, Publications of the Astronomical&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Society of the Pacific 88, 543&nbsp;

<P>Tully, R. B., &amp; Fisher, J. R. 1987, Nearby Galaxies Atlas (Cambridge&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; University Press, Cambridge)&nbsp;

<P>Tyson, J. A. 1986, J. Opt. Soc Am. A, 3, 2131&nbsp;

<P>Wade, R. A., Hoessel, J. G., Elias, J. H., &amp; Huchra, J. P. 1979,&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 91,
35&nbsp;

<P>Watanabe, M. 1983, Ann. Tokyo Astr. Obs., 2nd ser., 19, 121&nbsp;

<P>Watanabe, M., Kodaira, K., &amp; Okamura, S. 1982, Astrophysical Journal&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp; Supplements, 50, 1&nbsp;

<P>Watanabe, M., Kodaira, K., &amp; Okamura, S. 1985, Astrophysical Journal,
292, 72&nbsp;

<P>Wells, D. C., Greisen, E. W., &amp; Harten, R. H. 1981, A&amp;AS, 44,
363&nbsp;

<P>Whitmore, B. C., &amp; Kirshner, R. P. 1981, Astrophysical Journal,
250, 43&nbsp;

<P>Yoshizawa, M., &amp; Wakamatsu, K. 1975, A&amp;A, 44, 363&nbsp;
<BR>&nbsp;</TD>
</TR>
</TABLE></CENTER>
&nbsp;
</BODY>
</HTML>

