ID=G0098
URL=http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/diamond_jubilee/1920/cs_real.html
SIZE=57220
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:16:07
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<title> The `Great Debate': What Really Happened Page </title>

<p>
<h1> The 'Great Debate': What Really Happened </h1>

by Michael A. Hoskin, Editor, Journal for the History of Astronomy <br>

First appeared in J. Hist. Astron., 7, 169-182 <br>

Address: M. A. Hoskin, Churchill College, Cambridge, England, CB3 0DS <br>

E-mail: MAH15@UK.AC.CAM.PHX <br>

Copyright 1976 by Science History Publications Ltd. <br>

Reprinted with permission <br>

<p>

The meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington on 26 April
1920, at which Harlow Shapley of Mount Wilson and Heber D. Curtis of Lick
Observatory both gave talks under the title "The Scale of the Universe",
has passed into the literature as "The Great Debate".[1] It is true that
the two resulting papers [2] published in the May 1921 Bulletin of the
National Research Council contain the best presentations of the opposing
arguments in the current controversy over the dimensions of our Galaxy
and the status of the 'spiral' nebulae. But these papers, even if read
without comment or discussion, would have taken well over two hours to
deliver and therefore cannot possibly represent the proceedings at 'The
Great Debate', which took place at 8:15 p.m. with a Conversazione timed to
follow at 9:30.[3]  Nevertheless, most historians persist in treating these
published papers as the verbatim record of a dramatic trial of strength,
and so have created an historical romance. In what follows we draw on
surviving archives to compile a more accurate account of what actually took
place. 

<p>

The encounter grew out of a remark which George Ellery Hale, founder and
Director of Mount Wilson Observatory, made at a Council Meeting [4] of the
National Academy of Sciences late in 1919. Hale suggested that an evening
of the Academy meeting planned for the following April should be devoted to
one of the annual lectures paid from the fund set up in memory of Hale's
father, William Ellery Hale.[5] On 3 January C. G. Abbot, the Home
Secretary of the Academy, wrote to Hale: 

<p>

"You mentioned the possibility of a sort of debate, either on the subject
of the island universe or of relativity. From the way the English are
rushing relativity in Nature and elsewhere it looks as if the subject would
be done to death long before the meeting of the Academy, and perhaps your
first proposal to try to get Campbell and Shapley to discuss the island
universe would be more interesting. I have a sort of fear, however, that
the people care so little about island universes, notwithstanding their
vast extent, that unless the speakers took pains to make the subject very
engaging the thing would fall flat.... Are there not other subjects-the
cause of glacial periods, or some zoological or biological subject-which
might make an interesting debate?" [6] 

<p>

It is a little surprising that the island universe theory of spiral
nebulae- the claim that the spiral nebulae are galaxies in their own right
and independent of our Milky Way star system-was to be defended, not by
Curtis but by his Director at Lick Observatory, W. W. Campbell. For Curtis
had been engaged for nearly a decade on the photography of nebulae with the
Crossley reflector, and for much of that time had been an enthusiastic
convert to the island universe theory; only that March he had dined with
Hale in Washington within a week of lecturing on "Modern Theories of the
Spiral Nebulae" to the Washington Academy of Sciences.[7] And on 8 October,
when organizing the observing programmes for the 60in. and the new 100in.
reflectors at Mount Wilson, Hale had written to Campbell to say "We are
planning an extensive attack on spirals, with special reference to internal
motion, proper motion, spectra of various regions, novae, etc., and here
again <i> I should be glad to know what Curtis has in hand, so that our
work may fit in with it to advantage" </i> (emphasis supplied).[8] Whatever
the reason for the initial selection of Campbell as speaker,[9] by the time
the question comes up again in correspondence Hale had received from
Campbell a copy of the volume on nebulae published by Lick Observatory, in
which "three splendid contributions"[10] were the work of Curtis, and
thereafter Curtis and not Campbell is the projected speaker. Meanwhile,
however, Hale in fact favoured relativity, but on this Abbot had many
misgivings: 

<p>

"As to relativity, I must confess that I would rather have a subject in which
there would be a half dozen members of the Academy competent enough
to understand at least a few words of what the speakers were saying if we had
a symposium upon it. I pray to God that the progress of science will send
relativity to some region of space beyond the fourth dimension, from whence
it may never return to plague us." [11]

<p>

Evidently Abbot's views prevailed, for he cabled Hale on 18 February: "Am
wiring Heber Curtis suggesting Debate him and Shapley on subject scale of
universe for Academy meeting forty five minutes each suggest communicate
Shapley and Curtis and wire if favorably arranged."[12] Curtis accepted, at
first with marked reluctance, then with increasing relish at the prospect
of battle. Shapley likewise accepted-Hale was his 'boss' and the invitation
a compliment -but with deep misgivings, for his career was now at a
crossroads. In February 1919 the death of Edward C. Pickering had at last
brought to a close his fortytwo- year reign as Director of the Harvard
College Observatory. Pickering had been an outstanding administrator. The
obvious choice as successor would have been Henry Norris Russell, Shapley's
sometime teacher and mentor and the only American astronomer with influence
comparable to that of Hale, except that he lacked Pickering's
administrative abilities. Kapteyn, writing to Hale from Groningen, thought
Shapley perhaps the right candidate; [13] but Shapley, though a brilliant
and original astronomer, was as yet only in his mid-thirties. 

<p>

This handicap did not deter Shapley. In later life he vividly recalled the
day he heard of Pickering's death, and decided to "take a shot" at
succeeding him.[14]' He promptly wrote to both Russell and Hale to state
his claims.[15] Russell was equally frank in reply: "To tell the naked
truth, I would be very glad to see you in a good position at Harvard, free
from executive cares. . . . But I would not recommend you for Pickering's
place; and I believe that you would make the mistake of your life if you
tried to fill it." [16] To Hale, Russell remarked that Shapley "would not
suffer if he pondered the old fairy tale about the man who got all sorts of
good things from a magic fish whose life he had saved-until his wife wanted
to be Pope!" [17] Hale warned Shapley: "My advice to any candidate for a
position would be never to attempt to take an active part in securing it,
as this is the surest way to defeat one's end. [18] Shapley, chastened but
secretly unconvinced, wrote to both men to declare himself no longer a
candidate.[19] 

<p>

On 20 December, about the time that Abbot and Hale were considering Shapley
for the Washington meeting, A. Lawrence Lowell, the President of Harvard,
telegraphed to Mount Wilson: "Is Shapley coming East Xmas time for some
scientific meeting? If  so could he visit Cambridge? If not when could he
come here?"[20] The secretary's reply that Shapley had no such plans led to
a mysterious visit to Shapley from a Regent of Harvard. "He evidently
sailed under sealed and secret and telegraphic orders," Shapley told
Russell on 6 January with some excitement, "for he knew nothing of
astronomy or physics or science, or me or anyone here. He asked about the
scientific meetings here last June-that A.A.A.S. convention that I managed.
. . . I might say that I am naturally very confident that Harvard is not
too big for me and that the things I could and would do there would be a
credit to American astronomy."[21] The visitor's interest in Shapley's
ability as an organizer rather than as an astronomer was no doubt because
he was being considered, not for the Directorship, but for a post in
support of the new Director. Certainly in June Russell was to be offered
the Directorship with "a second astronomer, younger, and with modern ideas,
to be called, to act as the Director's right hand main" (Shapley was to
Russell the obvious choice),  and a third person to act as
administrator;[22] and even when Russell eventually declined, Shapley was
merely offered the post of Assistant Professor and Astronomer.[23] 

<p>

Evidently believing he was nominated for the Directorship itself, and eager
for the appointment, Shapley viewed the proposed encounter with Curtis with
dismay. As ill-luck would have it, Curtis was an experienced and
accomplished public speaker who might well put Shapley to rout, whatever
the scientific merits of their respective cases, and this-taking place
within easy reach of Harvard-could cost Shapley the Directorship. In the
ensuing flurry of correspondence between Shapley, Curtis, Hale and Abbot,
Shapley tried- half-heartedly-to get an Easterner substituted for
Curtis,[24] and-tenaciously- to undermine the seriousness and length of the
proposed encounter. Four distinguished and busy men repeatedly discussed
whether it should be a 'debate' as originally proposed, or a
'discussion'-"two talks on the same subject from our different
standpoints", as Shapley wished .[25] No sooner had Hale been won round by
Shapley to a 'discussion' than the latter received from Curtis a letter
which reawakened all his anxieties: 

<p>

"I agree with you that it should not be made a formal "debate", but I am
sure that we could be just as good friends if we did go at each other
"hammer and tongs". . . . A good friendly "scrap" is an excellent thing
once in a while; sort of clears up the atmosphere. It might be far more
interesting both for us and our jury, to shake hands, metaphorically
speaking, at the beginning and conclusion of our talks, but use our
shillelahs in the interim to the best of our ability."[26] 

<p>

Curtis sent a copy of the letter to Hale. It was 3 March before Hale could
talk with Shapley and formulate his reply: "I do not think that the
discussion should be called a 'debate', or that Shapley, who is perfectly
willing to speak first, should have time allotted him for 'rebuttal'. If
you or he wish to answer points made by the other, you can do so in the
general discussion." Each should be manifestly a seeker after truth,
"willing to point out the weak places in his argument and the need for more
results."[27] Not only had Shapley persuaded Hale away from the original
concept of a debate, but he had convinced Hale that the proposed 45 minutes
for each speaker was too long (on the grounds that this would tax the
patience of the audience), and that 35 would be better. Curtis was aghast.
The Lick Observatory Journal Club had recently devoted several meetings to
the size of the Galaxy and the problem of external galaxies,[28] and Curtis
had prepared a paper on the subject which he was circulating to friends for
comment.[29] He knew how long he needed to make a serious scientific case.
"We could scarcely get warmed up in 35 minutes", he protested to Hale.[30]
Again the letters passed back and forth, and eventually a compromise of 40
minutes was imposed.[31] 

<p>

The next problem concerned the subject matter. In Shapley's view, "The
Scale of the Universe" made Curtis's main concern, the island universe
theory, an incident to a general discussion of the present guesses as to
galactic dimensions and arrangement".[32] On the other hand, both men
recognized that if, as Shapley maintained, the Galaxy was much larger than
had previously been thought, it would be more difficult for Curtis to
sustain the claim that the spiral nebulae were independent island
universes; and it was clear from the pictorial slides Curtis proposed to
use that he would indeed concentrate on the island universe theory.[33] 
Shapley welcomed their different but interrelated approaches as offering
scope for a partnership instead of the dreaded confrontation: "I shall not
be able to get as far as details of nebulae in my half of the talk, but I
shall get some of the explanatory, introductory, illustratory requisites
out of the way so that you can probably go farther into the details."[34] 
But he knew that Curtis planned to present a serious scientific argument,
summarized on type- written slides which he would show to the audience.[35]
Shapley decided to appeal to Russell, his powerful ally, for vocal support,
though putting the suggestion as usual into the mouth of a senior
colleague: 

<p>

"I lead off (with pictures), then Curtis presents his views, and then
follows general discussion. Mr. Hale is anxious that you lead that
discussion in whatever way you see fit, and I believe he plans to ask the
presiding officer to call upon you as a starter. . . . 

<p>

"Curtis swears by Newcomb and other patriarchs, and will show (?) that my
distances are some ten times too big. Now that ten times, as Mr. Hale
realizes, is as bad on your hypotheses as on mine; it is a violation of
nearly all recent astrophysical theory. So unless Curtis actually bowls us
over with the only true truth in these celestial matters, you will be
interested in this general assault from the self-styled conservatives. 

<p>

"Professor Brown is here at the observatory; also Professor Frost. They, as
well as the people at Lick and at Mount Wilson, seem to regard that coming
discussion as a crisis for the newer astrophysical theories.... But, crisis
or not, I am requested to talk to the general public of non-scientists that
may happen to drop in. Consequently, whatever answer must be made to Curtis
and his school must be made in the discussion. 

<p>

"I write you this because you may be interested in knowing what the
situation is, and so that you may be ready to defend your own views if they
are imposed upon by either of us.  To make matters worse for me, Mr.
Agassiz of the Harvard Obs. Visiting Committee is coming down to the
lecture and to eat a lunch with me;  and  A.L.L. himself has written for an
appointment in Washington." [36] 

<p>

In fact Russell made so substantial a contribution in support of Shapley
that the question arose of whether he should be a third author of the
published version, for in July Shapley told Curtis: "Russell is probably
not coming in the published discussion, according to Hale, so either I
should have the come-back or I should know what you are going to do and
rebut in advance."[37] 

<p>

There remained the crucial question of the content and level of Shapley's
presentation in Washington.  His decision was to treat the National Academy
of Sciences to an address so elementary that much of it was necessarily
uncontroversial. The typescript he used-covered with pencilled emendations,
some in shorthand-runs to some 19 pages.[38]  Of these, the last three
pages are devoted to the intensifier he had developed to permit the
photography of very faint stars -irrelevant to the theoretical argument,
but perhaps directed in part to those members of the audience responsible
for the future development of Harvard College Observatory.  Of  the first
16, it takes him more than six to reach the definition of a light year! The
remaining ten pages are published below; this, and not the technical paper
which appeared over a year later, was what Shapley actually said in
Washington. 

<p>

Although Curtis intended to present his case through a series of
typewritten slides, he also had a script of sorts, no longer extant. It was
probably by way of introduction to the more technical material on the
slides, for he wrote to Shapley the following August: "I am sending with
this a copy of my talk at Washington. This will recall to you the general
lines of the arguments used.... Unfortunately, most of my actual argument
was shown in the form of typewritten slides; I have no copy of these to
send on to you at present. . . ."[39] These slides (or some of them) have
survived and are reprinted below.  They relate closely to the published
account, and at Washington must have formed an odd contrast to the
elementary talk by Shapley which had preceded. The contrast is echoed in
Shapley's letter to Curtis on 9 June, telling him that Hale thought that
"in a slightly different form the papers would  go to the Proceedings - he
favors that, in fact, even if the papers are long, providing the material
is suitable in being not too popular (like mine?) or too tabular or
technical (like yours?)". Curtis modestly accepted the criticism: "Yes, I
guess mine was too technical. I thought yours would be along the same line,
but you surprised me by making it far more general in character than I had
expected.  Had  some thoughts of changing entire character of my
presentation about five minutes before close of your part, but decided at
last minute to go ahead with program as planned."[40] 

<p>

A referee might have declared 'no contest', but insofar is there was a
contest, Curtis was the winner. Shapley in old age recalled: "Now I would
know how to dodge things a little better. . . . As I remember it, I read my
paper and Curtis presented his paper, probably not reading much because he
was an articulate person and was not scared. Curtis, writing to his family
on 15 May, reported "Debate went off fine in Washington, and I have been
assured that I came out considerably in front".[42] Russell, writing to
Hale in June about his invitation to become Director at Harvard, declared:
"Shapley couldn't swing the thing alone. I am convinced of this after
trying to measure myself with the job, and observing Shapley at
Washington"-but if Shapley joined Russell there as his 'second' he ought to
offer a lecture course for this "cultivates the gift of the gab, which he
needs. [43] 

<p>

In spite of the disparate performances, the occasion lived in the memory of
those directly or peripherally involved.[44]  For Curtis it was the climax
of his decade of research on the nebulae; by July he was at Allegheny
Observatory as Director and his creative years as an observer were over.
For Shapley it was the occasion when he (and Mrs Shapley!) were vetted for
the Harvard appointment. For the staff of the two great Californian
observatories, it was something of a duel between champions.[45] Above all,
the time was ripe for an appraisal of conflicting evidence and opposed
interpretations on the fundamental question of the nature of the universe
in the large; as R. G. Aitken of Lick remarked, 

<p>

"I would like to hear the debate between Curtis and Shapley. I have read
Curtis' paper-a very good one-and have had long talks with Shapley also,
and each one has many very good arguments to present. For my own part, I am
still "on the fence" on the question. I very greatly doubt the visibility
of half-a-million or more 'island universes' on the one hand, and, on the
other, I am not ready to accept Shapley's conclusions <i> on the basis of
his measuring-rod. </i> It seems to me that its value is not yet
sufficiently demonstrated. I am open to conviction."[46] 

<p>

Curtis went prepared for the fur to fly;[47] his contribution was by common
consent well presented and, as the slides show, at a high technical level.
Russell, a talker of legendary capacity [48] and an outstanding astronomer,
made a substantial reply from the floor, and we may be sure the rest of the
session was hard fought. No wonder it was a memorable occasion. But the
scientific argument and counterargument between Shapley and Curtis
enshrined in the Bulletin papers belong, not to the verbal fisticuffs of
Washington, but to their ensuing and protracted correspondence; and that is
another story. 

<p>

<h2>  Acknowledgements </h2>

This paper results from a study of theories of the Galaxy and the nebulae
c. 1920 carried out by the present writer and Professor Richard Berendzen.
Dr N. E. Wagman, when Director of Allegheny Observatory, kindly supplied
copies of the slides used by Curtis.- Mrs Margaret C. Walters (nee Curtis),
Mrs Margaret Russell Edmonson, and the Shapley family generously allowed
use of materials by Curtis, Russell and Shapley respectively. Grateful
thanks are also due to Dr H. W. Babcock (Director, Hale Observatories), Dr
Clark A. Elliott (Associate Curator, Harvard University Archives), Mr
Alexander P. Clark (Curator of Manuscripts, Princeton University Library)
and Miss Jean R. St. Clair (Archivist, National Academy of Sciences). 

<hr>

<h2> SHAPLEY'S WASHINGTON ADDRESS [49] </h2> 

... Now that we have a satisfactory unit of sidereal distance [the
light-year], let us go rambling about the universe. We see at one edge of
this Milky Way field a Cluster of stars-a typical phenomenon in the
galactic system. To the unaided eye we see the Pleiades as such a cluster;
stars of the constellation Orion also form a real physical system of stars
moving together and probably all of common origin. We know from special
investigations that even the big dipper is a stellar organization. We may,
indeed, trace by continuous steps the denseness and richness of the
clustering motive from the richest of globular clusters to the poorly
organized nearby systems. Messier 11 is a society of a few hundred stars,
forming an open cluster in a rich part of the galactic clouds. In the same
region is Messier 22, a transition type from open to globular clusters. It
is one of the nearest systems of its class-only 25,000 light-years away-
nearer and brighter than the great cluster in Hercules, Messier 13, but not
so well known because far  south and less condensed.  This eleven hour
exposure of Messier 13, made by Ritchey with the 60-inch reflector,
probably shows the faintest stars ever photographed with that telescope.
Since all globular clusters are very much alike except in distance, this
picture is suitable for an illustration of the dimensions and physical
properties of a typical system. 

<p>

We do not know how many stars are in Messier 13, probably not less than
50,000; about 30,000 have been counted, and the bottom has not yet been
reached. The distance of the cluster, I find, is some 35,000 light-years;
its linear diameter is therefore more than 350 light- years, and its total
radiation is 300,000 times that of our Sun. 

<p>

The Hercules cluster has been extensively studied. We know for example the
positions, magnitudes, and colors of all its brightest stars, and many
relations between color, magnitude, distance from the center and star
density, We now have the spectra of many of the individual stars, and their
radial velocities; and the velocity and spectral type of the cluster as a
whole. We know the types and periods of light variation of its variable
stars, the colors and spectral types of these variables, and something also
of the absolute luminosity of the brightest stars of the cluster from the
appearance of their spectral lines. With knowledge of all this structural
and historical detail, is it surprising that we venture to determine the
distance of Messier 13 and similar systems with more confidence than was
possible ten years ago when not a one of these facts was known or seriously
thought about? 

<p>

I shall not impose upon you the dreary technicalities of the methods of
determining the distance of globular clusters. That would involve
discussion of parallactic motion, probable errors, Cepheid variation, giant
stars, and such matters.  I think it will suffice to sketch briefly the
principles involved. 

<p>

For nearby stellar objects we can make direct trigonometric measures of
distance, using the earth's orbit or the path of the Sun through space as a
base line. For many of the more distant stars the spectroscopic method is
available, using the appearance of the stellar spectra and the readily
measurable brightness of the stars; for certain types of stars, too distant
for spectroscopic data, there is still a chance of obtaining the distance
by means of the photometric method. This simple device, which is one
particularly suited to studies of globular clusters, consists in
determining, by some indirect means, the real light power of a star, that
is, its so-called absolute magnitude, and then measuring its apparent
magnitude. Obviously, if a star of known real brightness is moved away to
greater and greater distances, its apparent brightness decreases; hence,
for such stars of known absolute magnitude, the apparent magnitude gives,
by a simple formula, the distance from the observer. 

<p>

As I have suggested before, it is because within recent years we have
advanced our knowledge so greatly that we can use these powerful
spectroscopic and  photometric methods of measuring distance. The advance
is in two directions; first, in the study of the nearby stars we have
learned of the uniformity in absolute brightness and spectroscopic
characteristics of  various types; and second, we have shown that in the
clusters we have exactly the same kinds of stars as those around the
sun-the same except that the cluster stars appear to be very faint. This
apparent faintness of the cluster stars is due to <i> distance, </i> and is
a  <i> measure </i> of it.  For instance, the very extensive studies by
Plummer, Kapteyn, and Charlier, have shown that stars of spectral type B in
the solar neighbourhood (the blue stars) are closely restricted around an
average absolute luminosity about 200 times that of the Sun. In Messier 13
we have the same types of stars. This we know from direct observations of
spectrum with the 60-inch and 100-inch telescopes, supplemented by
thousands of measures of color.  But these blue cluster stars, which are
actually about 200 times as bright as the Sun, appear to be only one
five-thousandth as bright as the Sun would be if it were 33 light-years
away; the distance of the blue cluster stars is therefore readily found to
be some 35,000 light-years, and <i> their </i> distance is of course that
of the whole cluster. 

<p>

You may ask, however, is it not likely that these stars in the cluster,
just because they are in a globular cluster, are of it different magnitude
from our standards, even though comparable in color and spectrum? May they
not be dwarfs in luminosity, and therefore not so far away? All the
evidence, theoretical and observational, argues to the contrary.  There
should be little doubt in this matter of comparability for several good
reasons. For instance, one reason-an all important one--<i> is that these
nearby stars are themselves cluster stars. </i>  I have already pointed out
the continuous sequence from the densest globular cluster to the
constellation Orion; and the stars in such open nearby clusters as the
Hyades, Orion, Scorpio, <i> are the standards. </i>

<p>

It is thus because of this comparability of local B stars with those of the
distant open and globular clusters, and because the absolute luminosities
of the local stars are based upon thousands of good measures of proper
motion and radial velocity, that the blue stars give us the strongest
evidence for the great distances of globular clusters. 

<p>

Similarly the giant red stars Of Our local clusters are found to be
comparable with the many red stars in globular clusters, and qualitatively
at least, they give through the photometric method the same distances for
remote systems as the blue stars give. 

<p>

Another class of stars, the Cepheid variables, have been used extensively,
and in much the same way, in exploring not only the system of globular
clusters but the star clouds of the Milky Way. By determining the
light-curve of such a star in any cluster, the distance may be known with
remarkable accuracy. The particular luminosity that corresponds to a given
period is found, as for the B stars and red giants, from studies of nearby
examples of the class. Professor Curtis may tell you more of the
photometric method of getting at the distances of the nearby Cepheid
variables-he may question the sufficiency of the data or the accuracy of
the methods of using it. But this fact remains: we could discard the
Cepheids altogether, use instead the thousands of B-type stars upon which
the most capable stellar astronomers have worked for years, and derive just
the same distance for the Hercules cluster, and for the other clusters, and
obtain consequently the same dimensions for the galactic system. 

<p>

To conclude, in the face of these results, that the Hercules cluster is not
approximately at the distance derived for it photometrically, is to avoid
the most direct, and simple, and conservative interpretation of the data.
To suggest, as I believe Prof. Curtis may do, that the clusters are only
one-tenth as remote as I place them, is equivalent to subscribing to views
so radical in several departments of astronomy and physics that we
instinctively hesitate. 

<p>

If the distances I have assigned must be decreased to one-tenth, then the
light-emitting power of distant cluster stars must be only one-hundredth
that of local cluster stars of exactly <i> the same types. </i>  As a
consequence I believe Russell's illuminative theory of spectral evolution
must be largely abandoned, and Eddington's brilliant theory of gaseous
giant stars must be greatly modified or given up entirely. Now both of
these modern theories have their justification, first in the fundamental
nature of their physical concepts, and second, in their great success in
fitting observational fact. Similarly, the period-luminosity law of Cepheid
variation would be meaningless; Kapteyn's classic researches on the
structure of the local cluster would need new interpretation, because his
luminosity laws could be applied locally but not generally; and a very
serious loss to astronomy would be that of the generality of the
spectroscopic method of determining star distances, in fact, the whole
application of that method as an independent tool, for it would mean that
identical spectral characteristics may indicate stars differing by five
magnitudes, depending merely upon whether the star is in the solar
neighborhood or in a distant cluster. 

<p>

With so many satisfactory methods and theories at stake-the very
foundations of modern astrophysics-is it any wonder that we hesitate and
argue against revolutionary interpretations ? I believe I cannot follow
Professor Curtis in calling those older, long-established interpretations
conservative. 

<p>

Suppose, therefore, we admit the obvious comparability of local cluster
stars with those of distant clusters; is there not, however, a possibility
that the distant stars appear faint through the loss of light in travelling
through space? The Mount Wilson photometric studies show, however, no
effect on star colors of such loss-a result checked by Hertzsprung and
others. Two Swedish students find no suggestion of it in their studies of
the very distant spiral nebulae. In the plane of the Milky Way, to be sure,
we have dark nebulosity that <i> may </i> obscure more distant objects
without affecting the color. But outside the galactic regions, and Messier
13 and most of the other globular clusters are far outside, we have in the
distinct correlation of the angular size of a cluster with the brightness
of its stars a fairly good proof of the absence of general light
absorption. That is, if a cluster were removed to twice the present
distance, its stars would be fainter, and also its area would be one-fourth
as large. That is just what we observe-the faint clusters small, the small
clusters faint-an obvious indication that the small faint clusters owe both
of these characters to distance. Whereas, if the faintness of the cluster
were due to obstruction of light, we should expect the angular diameter to
be little affected; moreover, we should also expect to find, in such
obstructed clusters, wholesale irregular variations, lopsidedness, and
other curious effects that are not observed, unless, miraculously, the
hypothetical obstructing matter were exactly at rest with respect to the
cluster beyond, or exactly uniform. 

<p>

When we accept that the distance of the Hercules cluster is such that its
stellar phenomena are all harmonious with local stellar phenomena, then it
follows that fainter, smaller clusters arc still more distant. Thirty of
the 86 known are more distant than 100,000 light-years; the most distant is
more than 200,000 light-years away, and the diameter of the whole system of
globular clusters is about 300,000 light-years. Since the affiliation of
the globular clusters with the Galaxy is shown by their concentration to
the plane of the Milky Way and their symmetrical arrangement with respect
to it, it also follows that the galactic system of stars is as large as
this subordinate part. During the past year we have found Cepheid variables
and other stars of high luminosity among the fifteenth magnitude stars of
the galactic clouds; this can only mean that some parts of the clouds are
more distant than the Hercules cluster. There seems to be good reason,
therefore, to believe that the star-populated regions of the galactic
system extend at least as far as the globular clusters. 

<p>

One consequence of the cluster theory of the galactic system is that the
sun is found to be very distant from the center of the Galaxy. It appears
that we are near the center of a large local cluster or cloud of stars, but
that cloud is at least 60,000 light years from the galactic center. Twenty
years ago Newcomb remarked that the sun appeared to be in the galactic
plane because the Milky Way is a great circle-an encircling band of
light-and that the sun also appears near the center of the universe because
the star density falls off with distance in all directions. But he
concluded as follows: 

<p>

"Ptolemy showed by evidence, which, from his standpoint, looked as sound as
that which we have cited, that the earth was fixed in the center of the
universe, May we not  be the victim of some fallacy, as he was?" 

<p>

The answer to Newcomb's question is: Yes, we have been victimized by the
chance position of the sun near the center of a subordinate system, and
misled by the consequent phenomena, to think that we are God's own
appointed, right in the thick of things. In much the same way ancient man
was misled, by the rotation of the earth, and by the consequent apparent
daily motion of all heavenly bodies around the earth, to believe that even
his little planet was the center of the universe, and that his earthly gods
created and judged the whole. If man had reached his present intellectual
position in a later geological era, he might not have been led to these
vain conceits concerning his position in the physical universe, for the
solar system is going rapidly away from the center of the local Cluster. If
that motion remains unaltered in direction and amount, in a hundred million
years or so the Milky Way will be quite different from an encircling band
of star Clouds, the local cluster will be a distant object, and the star
density will no longer decrease with distance from the Sun in all
directions. 

<p>

Remembering these delusions, relative to his physical status in the
universe, may we not appropriately ask if man is also biologically
blindfolded? Does he, perhaps, hold his self- assumed and self-defined
position at the peak of animal development as a victim of psychological
fallacy? 

<p>

Another consequence of the Conclusion that the galactic system is 300,000
light-years or more in greatest diameter, is its baring on the problem of
the spiral nebulae. I shall leave the description and discussion of this
debatable question to Professor Curtis. We agree, I believe, that if the
galactic system is as large as I maintain, the spiral nebulae can hardly bc
comparable galactic systems; if it is but one-tenth as large, there <i>
might </i>  be a good opportunity for the hypothesis that our galactic
system is a spiral nebula, comparable in size with the other spiral
nebulae, all of which would then be "island" universes of stars. On one
other point I think we also agree, or at least we should agree, and that is
that we know relatively so little concerning the spiral nebulae and we are
soon going to know relatively much because of the increasing activity in
the nebular field, that it is professionally and scientifically unwise to
take any very positive view in the matter just now. 

<p>

But to summarize my view, which I hope is not positive and which is
certainly subject to change if future data justify, the spiral nebulae are
distant objects, not members of our galactic system, except that the nearer
brighter ones have some sort of a relation to the Galaxy, not only in
distribution, but also in motion. This relation to the Galaxy may be
transitory for any given nebula, for with their enormous speeds of
recession, they may eventually pass out of our domain of space. I prefer to
believe that they are not composed of stars at all, but are truly nebulous
objects. For instance, these two photographs of the typical spiral, Messier
51, by Mr. Scares indicates that the nebulosity is not composed of stars-as
required by the island universe theory. The picture on the left is taken
with a plate sensitive to yellow light, the one on the right records the
blue light. The exposures are adjusted so that the superposed stars are of
the same intensity. If the arms of the spiral were composed of stars the
two pictures should be comparable in intensity throughout. If, however, the
spiral is truly nebulous, it would appear faint on the photograph in yellow
light. That, you see, is the actual condition in this system. No type of
star is known with anything like as large a negative color index as is
shown by the nebulosity in this spiral. But even if the spirals are
stellar, they are not comparable in size with our stellar system, and our
system is not comparable in constitution with the spiral nebulae. Professor
Curtis, I hope, will have time to go farther into this interesting
question.... 

<p>

<hr>

<h2> SLIDES SHOWN BY CURTIS IN WASHINGTON [50] </h2> 

[Hypertext editor's note: the position of the text on the slides has been
altered by conversion to hypertext format.  We are working to correct the 
problem.]

<p>

[A]  THE SIZE OF OUR GALAXY; OLDER VIEW

<p>

Studies of the distribution of the stars and the ratios between the numbers
of stars of successive magnitude have led a number of investigators to
fairly accordant dimensions for the galaxy. 

<p>

Wolf; about 14,000 light-years in diameter. <br>
Eddington; about 15,000 light-years. <br>
Shapley (1915); 20,000 light-years. <br>

<p>

"That the maximum radius of the Milky Way is probably not greater than ten
thousand light-years and may be somewhat less has been deduced from many
lines of evidence, the most important of which is the color of the faint
stars." (Mt. Wilson Contr., No. 116, 1915.) 

<p>

Newcomb; not less than 7,000 light-years; later-perhaps 30,000 light-years
in diameter and 5,000 light-years in thickness. 

<p>

A maximum galactic diameter of 30,000 light-years will be assumed as
representing sufficiently well the older view; it is perhaps too large. 

<p>

[cf. 2, pp. 195-6]

<hr>

[B] THE SHAPE OF OUR GALAXY OF STARS

<p>

Studies of the distribution of the stars over the entire sky, with
investigations based on the ratios between the numbers of stars of
successive magnitudes, have given the following results: 

<p>

1. The stars are not infinite in number, nor uniform in distribution.

<p>

2. Our Galaxy, delimited for us by the projected contours of the Milky Way,
contains possibly a billion suns. 

<p>

3. Our Galaxy is shaped much like a lens, or a thin watch, the thickness
being perhaps one-sixth of the diameter. 

<p>

4. Our sun is located fairly close to the center of figure of the Galaxy.

<p>

5.The stars are not distributed uniformly through this galaxy.  A large
proportion may be actually in the ring structure suggested by the
appearance of the Milky Way. There is some slight evidence for a spiral
structure. Our position near the center of figure of the Galaxy is not a
favorable one for a determination of the actual galactic structure. 

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, 196]

<hr>

[C] THE SIZE OF OUR GALAXY; SHAPLEY'S VIEW

<p>

From evidence to be referred to more fully later, Dr. Shapley has derived
very great distances for the globular star clusters, 220,000 light-years
for the most remote. 

<p>

The apparent distribution of these globular clusters shows incontrovertibly
that they are an integral feature of our galactic system. 

<p>

This evidence has formed the main reason for Dr. Shapley's adoption of a
diameter of 300,000 light-years for our galactic system, fully ten times
greater than that accepted hitherto. 

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, 197-81


<hr>

[D] THE STARS OF THE  MILKY WAY

<p>

The smaller postulated dimensions for the Galaxy require stars whose
absolute magnitudes are in fair accord with those of known distance. The
larger dimensions require a very large proportion of giant stars. 

<p>

Apparent                     Corresponding absolute magnitudes
Magnitudes                             for distances of

                                  10,000 l.y.    100,000 l.y.
8                                    - 4.4         - 9.4
10                                   - 2.4         - 7.4
12                                   - 0.4         - 5.4
14                                   + 1.6          - 3.4
16                                    +3.6      - 1.4
18                                    +5.6      +0.6
20                                    +7.6      +2.6

<p>

[cf. ref. 2,  p 200]

<hr>

[E]

<p>

The conditions of star concentration obtaining in the Magellanic Clouds and
in the globular clusters appear to render these regions of space unique as
regards variable stars. 

<p>

The Magellanic Clouds contain 1800 variable stars

<p>

Total of all variables in the rest of the sky, excluding those in
globular clusters 1686

<p>

The globular clusters contain numbers of variable stars ranging from 137 in
N.G.C. 5272 to 0 for N.G.C. 3293 and 4755. Practically all are shorter than
one day in period. Total...      509 

<p>

Short period cluster-type variables discovered to date in the rest of the
sky 45 

<p>

[? Replaced in ref. 2 by discussion of Cepheid variables and "giant" stars]

<hr>

[F] THE SPECTRUM OF SPIRAL NEBULAE

<p>

As island universes

<p>

The spectrum of the average spiral nebula is indistinguishable from that
given by a star cluster. 

<p>

It is such a spectrum as would be expected from a vast congeries of stars. 

<p>

In general type it resembles the integrated spectrum of our Milky Way. 

<p>

The spectrum of the spiral nebulae offers no difficulties in the island
universe theory of the spirals. 

<p>
<p>

As galactic phenomena

<p>

If the spiral nebulae are an integral part of our Galaxy, we must assume
that they are some sort of finely divided matter, or of gaseous
constitution. 

<p>

If galactic, we have no adequate and actually existing evidence by which we
may explain their spectrum. 

<p>

The diffuse nebulosities of our galaxy give a bright-line gaseous spectrum.
A few, associated with bright stars, agree with their involved stars in
spectrum, and are well explained as a reflection or resonance effect. 

<p>
Such an explanation is untenable in the case of a large proportion of the
spirals. 

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, p 212]

<hr>

[G]  THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SPIRAL NEBULAE

<p>

The spiral nebulae are found in greatest numbers just where the stars are
fewest (at the poles of our Galaxy), and not at all where the stars are
most numerous (in our galactic plane). No spiral has as yet been found
actually within the structure of the Milky Way. 

<p>

As island universes

<p>

It is most improbable that our galaxy should, by mere chance, be placed
about half-way between two great groups of island universes. 

<p>

So many of the edgewise spirals show peripheral rings of occulting matter
that this dark ring may be the rule, rather than the exception. 

<p>

If our Galaxy, itself a spiral on the island universe theory, possesses
such a peripheral ring of occulting matter, this would obliterate the
distant spirals in our galactic plane, and explain their peculiar
distribution. 

<p>

There is some evidence of such occulting matter in our galaxy. 

<p>

Additional observations on the spirals south of the galactic plane may
remove this recession excess. Part of this may also be due to the motion of
our Galaxy in space. 

<p>

As galactic phenomena

<p>

If the spirals are galactic objects, they must be a class apart from all
other known types. 

<p>

Their abhorrence of the regions of greatest star density can only be
explained on the hypothesis that they are, in some manner,  repelled by our
Galaxy. 

<p>

We know of no force adequate to produce such a repulsion, except perhaps
light pressure. 

<p>

Why should this repulsion invariably have acted at right angles to our
galactic plane ? 

<p>

Why have not some been repelled in the direction of our galactic plane? 

<p>

The repulsion theory is given some support by the fact that most of the
spirals observed to date are receding from us. 

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, p 213]

<hr>

[H] NEW STARS IN THE SPIRAL NEBULAE

<p>

Within the past few years some twenty-five novae have been discovered in
spiral nebulae, sixteen of these in the Nebula of Andromeda, as against
about thirty in historical times within our own galaxy. 

<p>

                            Apparent Magnitudes

<p>

                  Thirty galactic          Seventeen Novae in
                   Novae                   Neb. Andromeda
     At maximum     + 5                      about + 17
     At minimum     +15                    perhaps +27 ?

<p>

                    Absolute Magnitudes
<p>

     Novae in Nebula of Andromeda,      Four galactic Novae
           if at distance of             of known distance
               20,000 l.y.    500,000 l.y.
     At maximum     + 3.1         - 3.9               - 3.4
     At minimum     +13.1          +6.1                +7.2

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, pp 214-215]

<hr>

[J]  THE SPIRAL NEBULAE AS ISLAND UNIVERSES

<p>

Summary

<p>

1. On this theory we avoid the almost insuperable difficulties involved in
the attempt to place the spirals in any coherent scheme of stellar
evolution, either as a point of origin, or as a final evolutionary product.

<p>

2. On this theory, it is unnecessary to attempt to coordinate the
tremendous space-velocities of the spirals with average star velocities. . 

<p>

3. The spectrum of the spirals is like that given by a star cluster. 

<p>

4. A spiral structure for our own Galaxy has been suggested, and is not
improbable. 

<p>

5.  If island universes, the new stars observed in the spirals seem a
natural consequence of their nature as galaxies. Correlations between the
new stars in spirals and those in our Galaxy indicate a distance ranging
from perhaps 500,000 light-years in the case of the Nebula of Andromeda, to
10,000,000, or more light-years for the more remote spirals. 

<p>

6.  At such distances, these island universes would be of the order of size
of our own Galaxy of stars. 

<p>

7. Very many spirals show evidence of peripheral rings of occulting matter
in their equatorial planes. Such a phenomenon in our own Galaxy, regarded
as a spiral, would serve to obliterate the spirals near our galactic plane,
and would furnish an adequate explanation of the peculiar distribution of
the spiral nebulae. 

<p>

[cf. ref. 2, pp. 216-17]

<hr>

<h2> REFERENCES </h2>

<p>

1. Discussions include: Otto Struve, "A Historic Debate about the Universe",
Sky and telescope, xix (1959-60), 398-401 ; Norriss S. Hetherington,
"The Shapley-Curtis Debate", Astronomical Society of the Pacific Leaflet
no. 490 (April 1970); Otto Struve and Velta Zebergs, Astronomy of the
twentieth century (New York, 1962), chaps 19 and 20, passim; and "The Great
Debate", chap. 6 of Harlow Shapley, Through rugged ways to the stars (New
York, 1969). 

<p>


2. H. Shapley and H. D. Curtis, ','The Scale of the Universe", Bulletin of
the National Research Council, ii, Part 3 (May 1921). 

<p>

3. As shown by the official programme of the Academy meeting.

<p>

4. The meeting took place on 19 December. There is no reference in the
minutes to Hale's suggestion. 

<p>

5. W. E. Hale had used his wealth to support his son's projects, notably by
providing the disc for the 60in. telescope eventually erected at Mount
Wilson. 

<p>

6. Archives of the National Academy of Sciences.

<p>

7. As shown by the letters from Curtis to his children, 8 February and 9
March 1919 (Michigan Historical Collections, University of Michigan),
The script of Curtis's lecture is in the archives of Lick Observatory. 

<p>

8. Hale microfilm.

<p>

9. Not surprisingly, in 1968 Dr Abbot did not recall the reason for the
choice of Campbell, but remarked that Campbell was of course "a more
important astronomer than Curtis" (personal communication). Mr Robert Smith
points out that Campbell had supported the island universe theory in "The
Nebulae", Science, xiv (1917), 513-48. 

<p>

10. Letter of Hale to Curtis, 24 February 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

11. Letter of Abbot to Hale, 20 January 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

12. Hale microfilm. Hale cabled at once to Shapley and Curtis, offering
each an honorarium of $150. 

<p>

13. Letter of 7 February 1919 (Hale microfilm): "In America you have
Russell and Shapley. Shapley is a brilliant man and personally I, who know
him mainly only through his scientific work, would think him the best
fitted for the position. Meanwhile I do not know him sufficiently to know
how he would do as an organiser at the head of such a large and complicated
Institution as the Harvard Observatory."

<p>

14. Shapley, Through rugged ways to the stars, 82. 

<p>

15. Shapley to Russell, 12 February 1919, to Hale 13 February 1919 (Shapley
Archives, Harvard University). 

<p>

16. Russell to Shapley, 19 February 1919 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

17. Russell to Hale, 19 February 1919 (Russell Archives, Princeton University).

<p>

18. Hale to Shapley, 27 February 1919 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

19. Shapley to Russell, 27 February 1919; to Hale, 7 March 1919 (Shapley
Archives, Harvard University). 

<p>

20. Hale microfilm

<p>

21. Shapley to Russell, 6 January 1920 (Russell Archives, Princeton
University). 

<p>

22. Russell to Hale, 13 June 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

23. Invitation dated 10 November 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

24. Shapley to Hale, "Sunday", i.e. 22 February 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

25. Shapley to Hale, 19 February 1920 (Hale microfilm). On the 24th Hale
wrote to Shapley, Curtis and Abbot approving the concept of a 'discussion'.

<p>

26. Curtis to Shapley, 26 February 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard
University). 

<p>

27. Hale to Curtis, 3 March 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

28. Curtis to E. E. Barnard, 28 January 1920 (Archives of Yerkes
Observatory).  Curtis reports that "most of us here find it impossible
to subscribe to some of the recent theories on these points". 

<p>

29. Ibid.  On 23 February Curtis requested from Barnard the return of this
paper as a matter of urgency. 

<p>

30. Curtis to Hate, 9 March 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

31. Abbot to Hale, 18 March 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

32. Shapley to Abbot, 12 March 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

33. Curtis to Shapley, 14 March 1920.  Since Shapley maintained to the end
of his life that Curtis did not address himself to the subject of the title
(Shapley, Through rugged ways to the stars, 79), it is worth recording the
synopsis Curtis proposed to Hale (Curtis to Hale, 20 February 1920, Shapley
Archives, Harvard University) and which Hale welcomed: "Dr Shapley will
discuss recently secured evidence pointing to dimensions of our galaxy
about ten times greater than held in the older theories of the Milky Way,
i.e., a diameter of about 300,000 light-years, with the spiral nebulae
regarded as a galactic phenomenon. Dr Curtis will defend the older view
that our Milky Way is approximately of the dimensions suggested by Newcomb,
i.e., about 30,000 light-years in diameter, with the spiral nebulae
regarded as very probably individual galaxies, or 'island universes'." 

<p>

34. Shapley to Curtis, 18 March 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

35. Curtis to Shapley, 14 March 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

36. Shapley to Russell, 31 March 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

37. Shapley to Curtis, 27 July 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

38. Shapley Archives, Harvard University.

<p>

39. Curtis to Shapley, 2 August 1920 (Shapley Archives, Harvard University).

<p>

40. Shapley to Curtis, 9 June 1920; Curtis to Shapley, 13 June 1920
(Shapley Archives, Harvard University). 

<p>

41. Shapley, Through rugged ways to the stars, 79-80. In private
conversation Shapley was much more emphatic as to his disappointing
performance. 

<p>

42. Michigan Historical Collections, University of Michigan.

<p>

43. Russell to Hale, 13 June 1920 (Hale microfilm).

<p>

44. Writing to Shapley on 10 July 1922, Curtis spoke of "our memorable
set-to" (Archives of Allegheny Observatory). C. D. Shane of the
University of California (Berkeley) wrote to Curtis on 3 December 1923
about "the famous debate", and Curtis in reply on the 10th again referred
to "our memorable set-to" (Michigan University Archives). Campbell, writing
on "Do we live in a spiral nebula ?" in Popular Astronomy  for 1926, speaks
of the "memorable discussion" of 1920 (p. 175). 

<p>

45. Robert G. Aitken later wrote of Curtis that "For a time only his
colleagues at Mount Hamilton, and a few other astronomers agreed with him
in his views" (National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoirs, xxii
(1943), 280), and this may be true. although Aitken had forgotten that he
himself had been "on the fence" (cf. ref. 46 below). 

<p>

46. Aitken to Barnard, 27 April 1920 (Archives of Yerkes Observatory);
emphasis in original. 

<p>

47. "... some fur ought to fly, on both sides", Curtis to W. J. Hussey,
formerly of Lick Observatory, 15 April 1920 (Michigan Historical
Collections, University of Michigan). 

<p>

48. "He sure is a talker.... I never saw any man better qualified to teach
the unwashed astronomy then he", "Benny" writing to Shapley of a talk
by Russell to the general public at Mount Wilson, 30 June 1921 (Shapley
Archives, Harvard University). 


<p>

49. This rough typescript, now in Box 1 of the Shapley Archives at Harvard
University, contains pencil amendments in longhand, and occasionally
in shorthand. Those in longhand have been incorporated in this printed
text. Of the typescript, the first one- third is too elementary to justify
reprinting; likewise, the final three pages dealt with Shapley's
intensifier, and, however significant this might have been as an
instrumental advance in the study of faint stars, it was not directly
relevant to the theoretical discussion and is omitted here as it was in the
printed version of the proceedings (ref. 2). 


<p>

50. The slides survive at Allegheny Observatory.  Of the nine, eight are
represented in modified form in the printed version of the proceedings, as
indicated, and the slides have accordingly been arranged in a probable
order. The title of slide H suggests that Curtis may have used other slides
no longer extant, but surely very few additional slides could have been
fitted into a 40-minute talk. 

<p>

<a href="../debate20.html">
Return to the 1920 Great Debate Page </a>

<p>

