ID=G0385
URL=http://universe.gsfc.nasa.gov/roadmap/docs/SUVO.htm
SIZE=20852
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:18:16
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<html xmlns:o="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:office"
xmlns:w="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:word"
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40">

<head>
<meta name=Title
content="Following are answers to your questions on behalf of SUVO">
<meta name=Keywords content="">
<meta http-equiv=Content-Type content="text/html; charset=macintosh">
<meta name=ProgId content=Word.Document>
<meta name=Generator content="Microsoft Word 9">
<meta name=Originator content="Microsoft Word 9">
<link rel=File-List href="SUVO_files/filelist.xml">
<title>Following are answers to your questions on behalf of SUVO</title>
<!--[if gte mso 9]><xml>
 <o:DocumentProperties>
  <o:Author>Chris Schwartz</o:Author>
  <o:Template>Normal</o:Template>
  <o:LastAuthor>Chris Schwartz</o:LastAuthor>
  <o:Revision>2</o:Revision>
  <o:Created>2002-05-15T13:29:00Z</o:Created>
  <o:LastSaved>2002-05-15T13:29:00Z</o:LastSaved>
  <o:Pages>6</o:Pages>
  <o:Words>1642</o:Words>
  <o:Characters>9364</o:Characters>
  <o:Company>ACS-GS/CETI Lab</o:Company>
  <o:Lines>78</o:Lines>
  <o:Paragraphs>18</o:Paragraphs>
  <o:CharactersWithSpaces>11499</o:CharactersWithSpaces>
  <o:Version>9.3220</o:Version>
 </o:DocumentProperties>
</xml><![endif]--><!--[if gte mso 9]><xml>
 <w:WordDocument>
  <w:Zoom>150</w:Zoom>
  <w:DisplayHorizontalDrawingGridEvery>0</w:DisplayHorizontalDrawingGridEvery>
  <w:DisplayVerticalDrawingGridEvery>0</w:DisplayVerticalDrawingGridEvery>
  <w:UseMarginsForDrawingGridOrigin/>
 </w:WordDocument>
</xml><![endif]-->
<style>
<!--
 /* Style Definitions */
p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal
	{mso-style-parent:"";
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Times;}
p.MsoBodyText, li.MsoBodyText, div.MsoBodyText
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	border:none;
	mso-border-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;
	padding:0in;
	mso-padding-alt:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt;
	font-size:14.0pt;
	font-family:Times;}
@page Section1
	{size:8.5in 11.0in;
	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in;
	mso-header-margin:.5in;
	mso-footer-margin:.5in;
	mso-paper-source:0;}
div.Section1
	{page:Section1;}
-->
</style>
</head>

<body bgcolor=white lang=EN-US style='tab-interval:.5in'>

<div class=Section1>

<p class=MsoNormal align=center style='text-align:center'><span
style='font-size:18.0pt'><b>SUVO<o:p></o:p></b></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Following are answers to your questions on behalf of
SUVO.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>My apologies for my
tardiness.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>I've been trying to
collect input from a number of people regarding this presentation.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>As I will do in my oral presentation, I would like to first
give a sense of context.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>The SUVO
you are familiar with in the SEU strategic plan represents a specific set of
science goals and potential mission implementations articulated by the
UV/Optical Working Group (under the chairmanship of Mike Shull) in 1999
following the 1998 post-HST UV/optical science meeting in Boulder.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The UV/optical community recently met at the Hubble Science
Legacy workshop in Chicago, again with the broad goal of articulating science
goals and technology drivers for UV/optical astronomy in the post-HST era.<span
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>The white paper that results from this
activity (to be led by Rob Kennicutt and Garth Illingworth, the co-chairs of
the Chicago workshop) aims to present a broad strategic vision for UV/optical science
in the next 15-20 years.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>To quote
Rob Kennicutt, &quot;The follow-up roadmapping exercise almost certainly will
envision a phased development path that includes one or more SUVO-type
facilities leading to something more ambitious over the 15-year
timescale.&quot; (end quote).<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>It
is expected to address a number of potential mission concepts, including the
intriguing possibility of combining the original SUVO science goals with the
high-contrast-imaging goals of TPF.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>It is not the intention of the Hubble Science Legacy exercise to narrow
down to a single endorsed mission.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>As the invitation to your meeting came as a result of the
original SUVO's inclusion in the longterm SEU strategic plan, I would like to
ground my presentation in terms of a technical approach to those science goals,
but I emphasize that the resulting technology needs are common to other
potential scientific drivers and UV/optical mission concepts.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>What is extremely clear to me, and I hope will be clear to
your committee, is that the critical technology needs for SUVO (large aperture,
lightweight optics with UV/visible image quality and improved detectors, in
particular higher efficiency UV detectors) are fundamental to nearly all
mission concepts that intend to use UV/optical observations to address
important science goals beyond the reach of HST.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The specific SUVO concept I will discuss in most detail is
based on a 4-m monolithic telescope supporting point source UV spectroscopy of
quasars for probing the IGM and wide-field-imaging in the UV/optical for weak
lensing mapping of the dark matter distribution and for studies of stellar
populations. Other mission concepts involve 8-m telescopes addressing similar
science, but with more capability.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>One of the most prominent additional scientific directions involves
high-contrast-imaging (coronagraphy) for planet detection -- in this concept, a
large elliptical mirror (4m x 8-12m) could support both the TPF planetary
detection goals and the large-aperture SUVO goals.</p>

<span style='font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Times;mso-ansi-language:EN-US'><br
clear=ALL style='mso-special-character:line-break;page-break-before:always'>
</span>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(1) What are the Level 1 and Level 2 science requirements
for the proposed mission, and how do these motivate the candidate technologies
which will be investigated?<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Explain the connections between the science requirements and the
engineering requirements on those technologies. </p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&quot;Mapping the cosmic web&quot; -- probe the morphology,
composition of the intergalactic medium at an angular scale sufficiently fine
to map its density and structure.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>The technique utilizes ultraviolet spectroscopy of quasars in the
120-300 nm range to map the constituents of the IGM vs. angular position and redshift;
it thus requires the ability to reach a quasar magnitude at which the density
of quasars on the sky is sufficient to resolve the principal IGM
structures.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>To reach angular
scales below 10 arcminutes requires that the spectroscopic sensitivity reach to
quasars with mB ~ 20 at a spectral resolving power of ~30,000.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&quot;Tracing the production of metals over cosmic
time&quot; requires a similar sensitivity for UV spectroscopic observations of
quasars.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&quot;Mapping the dark matter&quot; in the universe at large
angular scales requires weak lensing measurements at high angular resolution
over much wider fields than can be achieved on the ground or currently with
HST.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The first two goals require UV spectroscopy with an
efficiency improvement of ~30 vs. HST, to be achieved with a combination of
mirror aperture, detector efficiency improvements, and observing efficiency
improvements (leaving low earth orbit).<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Roughly divided, we expect to achieve that factor with ~2.8 in aperture,
~5 in throughput (principally detector efficiency), and ~&gt;2 in observing
efficiency.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The wide-field imaging goals require roughly a 100-fold
increase over HST in the product of area/field of view/observing efficiency, at
better than HST-angular resolution.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>This would be divided roughly as 2.8 in area, 16 in field of view (to
~14' x 14'), and &gt;2 in observing efficiency.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Additional desirable enhancements include the ability to
measure OVI at low redshifts, requiring high reflectivity, sustainable coatings
reaching down near 1000 Angstroms.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Restricting the aperture to the 4m class for this version of
SUVO permits the use of a monolithic mirror within existing launch fairings; at
this size scale, it is likely to be easier to meet the image quality
requirements with a monolithic mirror rather than segmented.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Coupling to TPF goals would furthermore lead to requirements
for larger apertures (elliptical monolithic mirrors are considered highly
desirable) and superb final wavefront performance to improve achievable
contrast ratios by several orders of magnitude over HST (i.e. to 10^-8 at
sub-arcsecond separations).</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(2) What are the significant technological challenges for
these technologies --- i.e., which technical capabilities have not already been
demonstrated? </p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The principal technical challenges are in the production of
light-weight UV/visible quality optics of the required aperture, dramatic
improvement in the quantum efficiency of UV photon counters, and the deployment
of very large format radiation-tolerant visible detector arrays for the wide-field
imaging. Stretch goals include UV coatings that support the OVI wavelength
range without sacrificing significant throughput at longer wavelengths and (in
the case of a potential connection to coronagraphic science) the achievement of
superb system wavefront performance leading to very high contrast coronagraphy.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(3) For each technological challenge, what are the metrics
by which success --- i.e., technical readiness --- is to be measured? </p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Technical Challenges:</p>

<table border=1 cellspacing=0 cellpadding=0 style='border-collapse:collapse;
 border:none;mso-border-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
 <tr>
  <td width=167 valign=top style='width:167.4pt;border:solid windowtext .5pt;
  padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>Collecting optics</p>
  </td>
  <td width=275 valign=top style='width:275.4pt;border:solid windowtext .5pt;
  border-left:none;mso-border-left-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>mass per area (launch feasibility/affordability)</p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>wavefront error</p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>surface roughness </p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>encircled energy (the last three being related of course)</p>
  </td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
  <td width=167 valign=top style='width:167.4pt;border:solid windowtext .5pt;
  border-top:none;mso-border-top-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>UV detectors</p>
  </td>
  <td width=275 valign=top style='width:275.4pt;border-top:none;border-left:
  none;border-bottom:solid windowtext .5pt;border-right:solid windowtext .5pt;
  mso-border-top-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;mso-border-left-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;
  padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>quantum efficiency </p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>format size </p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>background rate</p>
  </td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
  <td width=167 valign=top style='width:167.4pt;border:solid windowtext .5pt;
  border-top:none;mso-border-top-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>Visible detectors</p>
  </td>
  <td width=275 valign=top style='width:275.4pt;border-top:none;border-left:
  none;border-bottom:solid windowtext .5pt;border-right:solid windowtext .5pt;
  mso-border-top-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;mso-border-left-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;
  padding:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt'>
  <p class=MsoNormal>mosaic format size </p>
  <p class=MsoNormal>radiation tolerance</p>
  </td>
 </tr>
</table>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(4) What kinds of demonstrations are required to validate
technical readiness?<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>Will ground
testing be sufficient, or are there technical capabilities which can only be
demonstrated in space?</p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The nominal performance of the 4m class optical system can
certainly be measured on the ground to verify that the system is at least
capable of meeting spec, though even ground test becomes more challenging in
the case of the very large TPF elliptical optic option; the in-flight
performance of the lightweight optical system in the face of gravity release
and the on-orbit thermal environment is a critical risk issue that can be
ameliorated with the incorporation of an active wavefront control capability
(actuators/deformable mirrors).<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Verification of this methodology with a smaller aperture system is
certainly desirable.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The detector goals can largely be validated on the ground --
formats and efficiency of course can.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Verification of background rates for UV detectors requires careful
simulation of charged particle effects (e.g. Cherenkov, phosphorescence) in
detector windows, as does the radiation tolerance of CCDs.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoNormal style='border:none;mso-border-alt:solid windowtext .5pt;
padding:0in;mso-padding-alt:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>(5) What is status of each
metric --- i.e., compare the current capability with the required capability?</p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The only large NASA mirror currently deployed in space with
the required SUVO optical performance is HST, at 180 kg/m2 areal density.<span
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>For launch practicality/cost, areal
density goals in the NGST range of 15 kg/m2 are appropriate.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>These density goals have been achieved for 1.2-1.5 m optics
in the AMSD program, with image quality performance appropriate to the near
infrared (e.g. 1-2 micron region).<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Hence, the overall mirror figure must be improved by a factor of 2-4 to
achieve diffraction limited performance at 0.5 micron, while scaling the format
up to 4 m diameter.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>Smooth surface
finish is also required for maintaining high encircled energy into the far UV,
though the SUVO science goals do not demand diffraction-limited image quality
in the ultraviolet.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The quantum efficiency of UV photon-counters must be improved
to the 50% level or greater.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Current HST photon counters are 8-10% in the 180-300 nm range, though
they do improve to ~25% at Ly alpha (122 nm) for STIS and are expected to reach
&gt;40% at Lyman alpha for COS.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The largest visible detector array flying on HST currently
is the new 4K x 4K ACS mosaic of two CCDs.<span style="mso-spacerun:
yes">&nbsp; </span>SUVO wide-field imaging demands at least 16K x 16K.<span
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>A number of mission concepts demand
similar or greater CCD mosaics (e.g. SNAP), and similar formats are or are
about to be deployed on the ground. Development of the relatively small ACS 4K
x 4K detector was surprisingly difficult, however, and the expected expense of
the CCD procurement and integration was one of the things that did in FAME, so
a lot of work remains here.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Radiation tolerance is a very serious issue; the impressive
p-channel CCD work on behalf of SNAP is very promising, though not yet flight
proven.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(6) Is the required capability a reasonable extension of
the current capability or does it require a significant advancement or new
approach</p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The optics performance is an extension of existing work on
behalf of NGST, though a decidedly non-trivial extension; even at near-infrared
performance requirements, scaling up from 0.5 m to 1.5 m in the mirror
demonstration programs has been a difficult, expensive process.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The dramatic improvement of UV photon-counting quantum
efficiency requires new approaches in photocathodes and microchannel plates,
toward carefully engineered solid state materials such as cesiated AlGaN or
related wide bandgap materials, preferably on clean, stable, silicon MCP
substrates.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Note that though energy-resolving detectors offer some very
exciting longterm possibilities, we do not view them as the likely solution to
the shorter term UV detector QE problem, due to issues of small formats,
difficulties of long wavelength rejection, and contamination concerns with
cryogenic operation.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<div style='border:solid windowtext .5pt;padding:1.0pt 4.0pt 1.0pt 4.0pt'>

<p class=MsoBodyText>(7) Is the specific technological challenge being
addressed for other applications?<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;
</span>Identify technical synergies with other NASA programs if they exist? </p>

</div>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>NGST will pioneer the lightweight optic path, but as noted,
at a significantly lower level of performance due to the longer wavelengths of
operation.<span style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>A number of other
missions (e.g. SNAP) share the large format visible detector needs.<span
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </span>SUVO (and related concepts) is the
primary driver for UV photon counter improvement.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></p>

</div>

</body>

</html>

