ID=G0722
URL=http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/diamond_jubilee/1920/curtis_obit.html
SIZE=7391
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:20:18
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<html>
<head><title> `Great Debate:' Obituary of Heber D. Curtis </title></head>
<body>
<p>
<h1> `Great Debate:' Obituary of Heber D. Curtis </h1>
<p>

This obituary was reprinted from PASP, 54, 68, 1942, with permission.

<hr>

<a href="http://www-pasp.stsci.edu/PASP-top.html">
<h2> PUBLICATIONS OF THE <br>
ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF THE PACIFIC </h2></a>

<PRE>
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
                                    
Vol. 54   San Francisco, California, April 1942   No. 318
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________

                  HEBER DOUST CURTIS
                     1872 - 1942

                 BY ROBERT R. McMATH
</PRE>

Heber Doust Curtis, Professor of Astronomy and Director of the Astronomical
Observatories of the University of Michigan, died in his home in the
Observatory residence at Ann Arbor, Michigan, on January 9, 1942.  His life
as an astronomer had led him throughout the world, and ultimately back to
his native state to spend his last years in familiar surroundings.  He is
survived by his wife, Mary D. Rapier Curtis; a daughter, Margaret, Mrs. A.
J. Walters; and three sons, Rowen D., Alan D., and Baldwin R. 

<p>

Professor Curtis was born in Muskegon, Michigan, on June 27, 1872.  His
early schooling in the Detroit, Michigan, public schools was followed by
five years at the University of Michigan, where he received his A.B. and
A.M. degrees.  Later, at the University of Virginia, he received his Ph.D.
degree in Astronomy.  In the year 1930 he was given an honorary Sc.D.
degree by the University of Pittsburgh in recognition of his many
achievements in the field of Astronomy. Memberships in both learned and
popular societies were many, including the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific (President, 1912); Fellow, The American Association for the
Advancement of Science (Vice-President, Section D, Astronomy, 1924);
American Astronomical Society (Vice- President, 1926); National Academy of
Sciences; American Philosophical Society; Research Club (University of
Michigan); Royal Astronomical Society, Foreign Associate; Astronomishe
Gesellschaft; International Astronomical Union, Commission 13, Solar
Eclipses; Phi Beta Kappa; Sigma Xi; and Phi Kappa Phi.  He was Henry
Russell lecturer at the University of Michigan in 1938. 

<p>

During his undergraduate years at the University of Michigan, his interests
were mainly in the classical languages.  His first seven years after
graduation were spent as a teacher.  He taught Latin in the Detroit High
School during the academic year 1893-94, and was then Professor of Greek
and Latin at Napa College (California) until 1896, when he became Professor
of Mathematics and Astronomy at the College of the Pacific - all before he
turned to Astronomy as a career.  In 1900, Curtis accompanied the Lick
Observatory - Crocker Eclipse Expedition to Thomaston, Georgia, as
volunteer observer.  This, his first eclipse expedition, was followed by an
appointment to the Vanderbilt Fellowship at the University of Virginia,
which he held for two years, receiving his Ph.D. degree in Astronomy in
1902. 

<p>

For eighteen years, starting in 1902, Curtis was associated with the Lick
Observatory. From 1902 to 1905, he served as Assistant and Assistant
Astronomer, from 1906 to 1910, as Acting Astronomer in charge of the D. O.
Mills Expedition to the Southern Hemisphere at Santiago, Chile, and from
1910 to 1920 as Astronomer at Lick Observatory.  The war years, 1917 to
1918, were spent in organizing and conducting a navigation school for the
United States Shipping Board in San Diego, California, in teaching
navigation in the Naval Officers' School in Berkeley, and as research
physicist in the Optical Section of the National Bureau of Standards in
Washington, D.C., where for a time he was acting head of the Optical
Section. 

<p>

Upon his return from Chile in 1910, Professor Curtis was placed in charge
of the Crossley reflector to continue the survey of the nebulae begun by
Keeler.  He regarded the results of this survey (Pub. Lick Obs. 13, 1-74,
1918) as his most important contribution to astronomy, but the mechanical
modifications which he made in the Crossley to facilitate his observational
program gave him as much personal satisfaction.  Detailed descriptions of
his many researches will be found elsewhere. 

<p>

In 1920 the University of Pittsburgh selected Curtis as the Director of the
Allegheny Observatory.  In the ensuing decade, his penchant for machine
work and the designing of apparatus found expression in the many
instruments that he designed and constructed, primarily for use in the
Allegheny Observatory, but also for four solar eclipse expeditions of which
he was a member.  In 1930, the Allegheny Observatory Eclipse Expedition to
Gerlach, Nevada, was headed by Curtis.  He also built, in the Allegheny
shops, a long-screw measuring engine for the Sproul Observatory.  The
problems that he encountered and solved in constructing an accurate screw
led him to make preliminary plans for a grating ruling engine.  He always
regarded a successful ruling engine as "the most perfect man-made
mechanism," and he was eager to try to build one. 

<p>

In 1930 he accepted the Directorship of the Astronomical Observatories of
the University of Michigan.  Professor Curtis came to Michigan prepared to
design a large reflecting telescope for the University Observatory at Ann
Arbor.  By the time he completed design of the telescope, the 1932
depression was at its "lowest," and funds were no longer available for its
construction. In spite of the scarcity of funds, however, Curtis was able
to organize and lead the University of Michigan Eclipse Expedition to
Fryeburg, Maine, in 1932.  This was the eleventh, and last, of the eclipse
expeditions in which he took part. 

<p>

When Professor Curtis came to Michigan, the development of the
McMath-Hulbert Observatory as a private institution was well under way.  He
immediately took a great interest in the Lake Angelus project, and was in
almost daily touch with the writer until the day of his death. His
contributions to the McMath-Hulbert Observatory cannot be measured. 

<p>

During the last eleven years, the writer and Professor Curtis were
constantly together, both socially and professionally.  First, last, and
always, Heber D. Curtis was a man.  Sympathetic understanding was always
available for those in need; clear-headed, concise thinking about all
problems was one of his many fine characteristics, but when the situation
demanded, Professor Curtis could be all "iron."  The writer was indeed
privileged to call Heber D. Curtis his friend. 

<p>

Astronomers will recall the note by Campbell at the 1900 eclipse: "We do
not see how we could have dispensed with his services, nor how anyone could
have met the exacting demands better than he did." 

<p>
<PRE>
               McMATH-HULBERT OBSERVATORY
                 UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
                      MARCH 1942
</PRE>

<p>

<a href="../debate20.html">
Return to the 1920 Great Debate Page </a>

<p>
</body>
</html>

