ID=G0840
URL=http://universe.gsfc.nasa.gov/roadmap/docs/MAXIM.htm
SIZE=16142
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:21:08
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<html>

<head>
<meta name=Title
content=" In preparation for this meeting, we would like you to prepare answers">
<meta name=Keywords content="">
<meta http-equiv=Content-Type content="text/html; charset=macintosh">
<meta name=ProgId content=Word.Document>
<meta name=Generator content="Microsoft Word 9">
<meta name=Originator content="Microsoft Word 9">
<link rel=File-List href="MAXIM_files/filelist.xml">
<title> In preparation for this meeting, we would like you to prepare answers</title>
<style>
<!--
 /* Font Definitions */
@font-face
	{font-family:Tahoma;
	panose-1:0 2 11 6 4 3 5 4 4 2;}
 /* Style Definitions */
p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Times;}
p.BalloonText, li.BalloonText, div.BalloonText
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	font-size:8.0pt;
	font-family:Tahoma;}
span.msoIns
	{text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;
	color:teal;}
@page Section1
	{size:8.5in 11.0in;
	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in;}
div.Section1
	{page:Section1;}
-->
</style>
</head>

<body bgcolor=white lang=EN-US style='tab-interval:.5in'>

<div class=Section1>

<p class=MsoNormal align=center style='text-align:center;text-indent:0in;
mso-text-indent-alt:0in'><span style='font-size:20.0pt;color:black'><span
class=msoIns><ins cite="mailto:Chris%20Schwartz" datetime="2002-05-14T16:57">MAXIM</ins></span></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> In preparation for this meeting, we would like you to
prepare answers</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> to the following questions, and send them to the SEU
Technologist,</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> Chris Scwharz (chris.schwartz@gsfc.nasa.gov) by April 30. 
These</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> questions can also be used to motivate your presentation at
the meeting:</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (1) What are the Level 1 and Level 2 science
requirements for</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> the proposed mission, and how do these motivate the</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> candidate technologies which will be investigated? 
Explain the</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> connections between the science requirements and the</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> engineering requirements on those technologies</b><span
style='font-weight:normal'>.</span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The principal science requirement is to resolve the event
horizons of black holes and study matter in the extreme gravitational limit.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>To perform these observations on a variety of targets requires
resolution in the 0.1-0.3 micro-arcsecond range.  Images must be acquired in
the x-ray between 0.3 and 7.0keV, where material emits strongly with detectable
emission lines. Maxim will require spectral resolution (E/<span
style='font-family:Symbol'>d</span>E) in excess of 10 from its imaging detector
for studying velocity fields in the accretion disk and jet forming regions.
Field of view must be at least 100x100. Images must be acquired in
significantly less than an orbital time, driving the need for at least 1000cm<sup>2</sup>
of effective collecting area.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>To be able to achieve these goals, MAXIM will make use of
X-ray Interferometry. The baseline of the interferometric array needs to be
about one kilometer. Apertures must sample all required parts of the UV plane
simultaneously because of rapid target variability, most likely requiring a
deployable array of apertures for the lower frequency apertures and formation
flying spacecraft for the high frequency apertures.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Each aperture will feature flat mirrors at grazing
incidence. Grazing incidence provides broadband throughput to support spectral
analysis, and a large reduction in the precision required of the optics.
Mirrors in the range of <span style='font-family:Symbol'>l</span>/100 to <span
style='font-family:Symbol'>l</span>/300 (<span style='font-family:Symbol'>l</span>=6328&Aring;)
are required to maintain wavefront coherence. Flat mirrors reduce the
difficulty of mirror figuring. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>A CCD detector array will meet the needs of the focal plane.
To achieve needed plate scale, the detector will be on a separate spacecraft up
to 20,000km away. This craft needs to be held to the line of sight to the
target to within inches and needs knowledge to about 10 microns.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b>(2) What are the significant technological challenges for
these</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> technologies --- i.e., which technical capabilities have
not already</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> been demonstrated?</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal> There are three outstanding technical challenges.  The rest
of the technical challenges can be met with fully demonstrated technology.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i>Line of Sight:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Our single most challenging technology is set by the
requirement to measure the line of sight from the detector, through the center
of the array to the target at the sub-micro-arcsecond level. This is a relative
requirement.  Absolute astrometry is not required. There are a variety of
approaches to this challenge currently being reviewed.  </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The first general approach is to build very high precision
startrackers, effectively an extension of the techniques of HST and SIM. Here,
we must contend with issues of gravitational distortion, proper motion,
parallax, aberration of  light, and others. Along these same lines we are
investigating a sparse x-ray interferometer to monitor a stable, distant x-ray
source, like a BL Lac, and use it as a reference line.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Other possibilities include advanced inertial reference
guidance with superconducting gyroscopes (eg.  Gravity Probe-B), distributed
spacecraft laser ring gyroscopes (eg. the Kilometric optical Gyroscope of
Starlight), or atomic interferometric gyroscopes (eg. the proposed ESA Hyper
mission). These would then be coupled to a laser positioning system for the
detector craft.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i>Formation Flying:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The next undemonstrated technology is the precision
formation flying.  Metrology to tens of microns over 100 km distances has been
demonstrated for formation flying, but spacecraft control at this level has not
yet been demonstrated. If we are to use free-flying mirror craft, then this control
is required for array stability. The control required on the detector craft is
much looser, although knowledge is required to the ten micron level.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i>Diffraction Limited Mirrors:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The requirement for flat mirrors in the <span
style='font-family:Symbol'>l</span>/200 range has been demonstrated many times
on the ground. We need to make mirrors of an unusual shape, keep the weight
down, mount, launch and maintain them in orbit. This is a challenging optical
requirement.  However, it is an evolutionary step that should be soluble by
standard development techniques.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> </b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (3) For each technological challenge, what are the
metrics by which</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> success --- i.e., technical readiness --- is to be
measured?</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal> The Line-of-Sight (LOS) metrics of success will fall into
two categories.  First, the requirement is to determine the relative
displacement of one satellite as viewed from another  spacecraft to about 100
nanoarcseconds. The requirement is to have a stable inertial (or celestial)
reference at ~100 nanoarcseconds.  Note that these metrics are not necessarily
the pointing stability of an individual space craft, but rather the alignment
of the interferometer-detector line with the celestial sphere. For MAXIM, each
individual spacecraft has a tremendous insensitivity to pitch and yaw compared
to the target resolution because the components behave like thin lenses.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The metric of success for formation flying will be the
ability to control a spacecraft relative to another, several hundred meters
away, at the level of 10 microns.  There is a looser formation flying metric
concerning the relative position of the detector space craft to the optics :
inches to meters of control, but at drastically further range (hundreds to
thousands of km.) </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Conventional mirror evaluation and space qualification
methods can be used to validate the optics and their flight-worthiness.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (4) What kinds of demonstrations are required to
validate</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> technical readiness?  Will ground testing be sufficient,
or are there</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> technical capabilities which can only be demonstrated in
space?</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> </b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>For both of our most challenging technologies (LOS and
formation flying), ground demonstration is impossible.  Indeed, to be stable
enough, we probably need to work in the thermally stable, low-gravity gradient
environment around the L2 point. This is one of the central justifications for
a pathfinder mission (MAXIM Pathfinder). The pathfinder will give us validation
of the key techniques in a less challenging role, give us general experience
with x-ray interferometry and open up the initial science.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>However, some components can be ground tested. For example,
the superconducting gyroscopes (with ~1/2 microarcseconds of drift a day) of
Gravity Probe B (GP-B) have been partially demonstrated.  Also, GP-B has
developed techniques and hardware to verify their star tracker sensitivity at
the 100 microarcseond level.  Similarly, SIM has developed methods to ground
test their astrometric capabilities.  Some control loop components for
formation flying can be ground tested as well.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The diffraction limited mirrors can be built and tested on
the ground using conventional means.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b>&nbsp;</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (5) What is status of each metric --- i.e., compare the
current</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> capability with the required capability?</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> </b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>For Line of Sight,  the current best flown technology is the
Hubble Fine Guidance Sensor (FGS) which achieves better than 10 mas of control
and  about one mas knowledge.  </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>There is progress along several possible paths toward the
LOS requirements for microarcsecond imaging.  SIM has ground tested its
astrometric system to better than tens of  microarcseconds. GP-B has tested its
quartz telescope to100 microarcseconds using an &quot;artificial star&quot;-
this could be directly applicable to a formation flying beacon sensor.   The
superconducting gyroscopes on GP-B have been ground tested, achieving inferred
drift rates of 1/2 microarcsecond/day  (100,000 gyroscope hours).   
Furthermore, all the GP-B technology is at flight readiness levels now (expect
launch in 2003).  Once in orbit, the gyroscopes are expected to have drifts of
&lt; 60 nanoarcseconds/day.  More exotic gyroscopes based on atomic
interferometry have achieved the levels of the best laser ring gyros (10s of
microarcseconds/second of drift) in the laboratory with promise to improve by
several orders of magnitude.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal> The highest precision formation flying control to date has
involved humans either as astronauts or remote pilots.  Formation flying
sensing at the 10 micron level over 100 km has recently been demonstrated with
GRACE.  If the control can be brought to the same level as sensing in an
autonomous way, then the MAXIM formation flying issues are essentially solved.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>High precision mirrors (&gt;<span style='font-family:Symbol'>l</span>/200)
have been made in the laboratory.  These will need to be made lighter for space
flight.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (6) Is the required capability a reasonable extension of
the current</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> capability or does it require a significant advancement
or new approach?</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> </b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> The requirement for LOS knowledge is well beyond what has
flown.  The current tested capabilities shown for SIM and GP-B are exciting ,
but the costs of these missions are frightening.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>GP-B's quartz telescope and superconducting gyroscope are
very close to what we need- but we are not sure if the costs will drop.  For an
option to do LOS using GP-B like technology, we have several advantages: 1) the
basic development is done, 2) we will have cryocoolers (for NGST and Con-X)
available to replace cryogen and associated problems with magnetic flux pinning
 on the ground.  3) Squid technology has significantly improved for the
gyroscope readout. . 4) no guide star needs to be found- eliminating the need
for nanoarcsecond readout gimbals and mechanisms.  Use of atomic
interferometers as gyroscopes has big potential- but is a significant new
approachOn the other hand, using x-ray interferometry of BL Lac&#8217;s relies
on the same technology we must develop for the mission. While it might require
some added complexity, it will not require a major additional advance in
capability.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> Autonomous precision formation flying is still untested. 
But, because other missions have similar and more extreme requirements, Maxim
will not make this advancement alone, or even be the first.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> (7) Is the specific technological challenge being
addressed for other</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> applications?  Identify technical synergies with other
NASA programs if</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal><b> they exist.</b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>  </p>

<p class=MsoNormal> The most challenging technologies for MAXIM are similar to
those for several other future NASA missions.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i> Formation Flying:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> Formation flying is required for several missions.  For
LISA and the Gamma Ray Lens Black hole Imager, the range requirements are
longer than for MAXIM.  In terms of tightness of control, the Stellar Imager
(SI) mission will require much tighter formation flying control than MAXIM. 
The same is true for some options for TPF. Some of MAXIM's formation flying
knowledge requirements are very similar to what is now being achieved with
GRACE.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal> </p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i> Line-Of -Sight:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal> LOS requirements for MAXIM are also applicable to all other
microarcsecond imaging missions, which include iARISE and the Gamma Ray Lens
mission.  At the 100 microarcsecond level, Stellar Imager (SI) also has beyond
the state of art requirements.  MAXIM Pathfinder will have requirements similar
to SI in this regard.   Even TPF will extremely high precision pointing (100
microarcsecond level) in order to null out the central star of planetary
systems.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Possible solutions include duplicating some aspects of SIM
or GP-B.  GP-B, being ready to launch with inertial reference capabilities
directly applicable to those needed.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal><i>Diffraction Limited Optics:</i></p>

<p class=MsoNormal>MAXIM will not be pushing the limits for space qualified
high precision optics. For example, the TPF coronagraph needs  big (10 m long) <span
style='font-family:Symbol'>l/200 </span>optical surfaces.  Also, SI will
require optics of  nearly identical quality to MAXIM.</p>

</div>

</body>

</html>

