ID=G0978
URL=http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/diamond_jubilee/d_1996/hubble_nas.html
SIZE=5949
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:21:56
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<head>
<title> The Scale of the Universe Debate: Hubble Memoir </title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#F4F4FF">
<center>

<h1> EDWIN POWELL HUBBLE </h1>
<p>
November 20, l889-September 28,l953 <br>
from an article by <br>
N.U. Mayall <br>
in <p>
BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS  NAS 41 <p>

Courtesy NASA SpaceLink <p>
</center> 
<hr>
Edwin Hubble, by his inspired use of the largest
telescope of his time, the 100 inch reflector on the Mount
Wilson Observatory, revolutionized our knowledge of the
size, structure, and properties of the universe.  Hubble
advanced the astronomical horizon on the universe by steps
relatively as large in his time as those taken by Galileo in
his studies of the solar system, and by the Herschels in
their investigations of our own Milky Way stellar system.
Edwin Hubble thus became the outstanding leader in the
observational approach to cosmology, as contrasted with the
previous work that involved much philosophical speculation. <p>
 
 
      Edwin's mother was Virginia Lee James, from Virginia
City, Nevada, and his father was John Powell Hubble, from
Missouri, where Edwin himself was born in Marshfield on
November 20, l889, during a visit of the parents to his
grandparents. <p>
 
     He liked and read many books, such as novels by Jules
Verne and H. Rider Haggard, especially King Solomon's Mines.
His father was connected with an insurance company; he had
his office in Chicago and settled his family in suburban
Wheaton. <p>
 
     Young Edwin corresponded with his grandfather, who once
wrote to his twelve-year-old grandson to ask some questions
about Mars.  The reply so pleased the grandfather that he
had it printed in a Springfield newspaper. <p>
 
     Like many youngsters, Edwin earned his first money by
delivering morning papers in Wheaton.  At Wheaton High
School he participated actively in athletics, with football
as his favorite game, although he also entered many track
events.  On his high school commencement day in l906, the
principal said, "Edwin Hubble, I have watched for four years
and I have never seen you study for ten minutes." He then
paused for what was an awful moment for Edwin, and
continued, "Here is a scholarship to the University of
Chicago." <p>
 
     By a mistake, this high school scholarship was also
awarded to another student, thus the money had to be halved,
and Edwin had to supply the rest.  He paid his expenses by
tutoring, by summer work, and in his junior year, by a
scholarship in physics and by working as a laboratory
assistant to Robert Millikan.  He received a college letter
in athletics for his participation in track, boxing, and
basketball. <p>
 
     In l910 Hubble received his B.S. degree from the
University of Chicago, and in the same year was awarded a
Rhodes Scholarship, under which he read Roman and English
Law at Queens College, Oxford.  Some years later he was made
an Honourary Fellow of Queen's College.  He returned to the
United States in l913, passed the bar examination September
2, and practiced law halfheartedly for a year thereafter in
Louisville, Kentucky.  He reported that at this time he
"chucked the law for astronomy, and I knew that even if I
were second-rate or third-rate, it was astronomy that
mattered."  Thus in l914 he returned to the University of
Chicago for postgraduate work leading to his doctoral degree
in astronomy.  <p>
 
     While finishing work for his doctorate early in l9l7,
Hubble was invited by Hale to join the staff of the Mount
Wilson Observatory, Pasadena, California.  Although this was
one of the greatest of astronomical opportunities, it came
in April of that fateful year(World War I).  After sitting
up all night to finish his Ph.D. thesis, and taking the oral
examination the next morning, Hubble enlisted in the
infantry and telegraphed Hale, "Regret cannot accept your
invitation.  Am off to the war." <p>
 
     Hubble was commissioned a captain in the 343d Infantry,
86th Division and later became a major.  He was sent to
France where he served as a field and line officer. He
returned to the United States in the summer of l9l9, was
mustered out in San Francisco, and went immediately to
Pasadena, California, Mount Wilson Observatory. <p>
 
     On February 26, l924, Edwin Hubble and Grace Burke were
married in Pasadena, California.  Mrs. Hubble recalls that
the first description of her future husband was given to her
by W.H. Wright, at that time Astronomer in the Lick
Observatory.  "He is a hard worker," he said, "he wants to
find out about the universe; that shows how young he is." <p>
 
     Hubble worked at the Mount Wilson Observatory until the
summer of 1942, when he left to do war work at the Aberdeen
Proving  Ground. For his valuable service to his country
during the war he was awarded the Medal of Merit in 1946. <p>
 
     After World  War II Hubble returned to his position at
the Mount Wilson Observatory where his research, so
brilliantly carried out between two world wars, had provided
strong evidence of the need for a telescope larger than the
100-inch reflector.  He had assisted greatly in the design
of the 200-inch Hale telescope, and had served on the Mount
Wilson Observatory Advisory Committee for building the Mount
Palomar Observatory.  "With the 200-inch," he said in a BBC
broadcast in London," we may grasp what now we can scarcely
brush with our fingertips."  "What do you expect to find
with the 200-inch?" he was asked, and he replied, "We hope
to find something we hadn't expected." <p>
 
     ...he (Hubble) continued his researches at the Mount
Wilson and Palomar Observatories, where he was active until
his death, from a cerebral thrombosis, September 28, l953. <p>

<hr>

<a href="http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/diamond_jubilee/debate_1996.html"
>Return to The Scale of the Universe Debate 1996</a>

</body> 

