ID=H0156
URL=http://home13.inet.tele.dk/palm/dinweb.htm
SIZE=39789
DATE=11/07/2002
TIME=17:02:05
DATASET=Biology
HTML=<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="Author" content="Svend Palm">
<meta name="description"
content="Dinosaurs evolved from two-legged archosaurs. At the end of  Cretaceous they">
<meta name="keywords"
content="dinosaur, paleontology, archosaur,  bird, bird-origin, carnosaur, Cretaceous,diapside,">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage Express 2.0">
<title>The Dinosaur Origin and Extinction</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td bgcolor="#00FFFF"><a
        href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk/palm/"><font size="2"
        face="Verdana"><b>Go to Homepage.</b></font></a></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p><font size="6" face="Arial"><b>The Dinosaur Origin and
Extinction.</b></font></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>A proposal on how the dinosaurs
originated and disappeared, and on their mutual relations.</b></font></p>

<p><font face="Arial">By Svend Palm. Lindbjergvej 13, DK 2750
Ballerup, Denmark.</font></p>

<p><font face="Arial">E-mail:</font><a
href="mailto:palm@post7.tele.dk"><font color="#FF0000"
face="Arial"> palm@post7, tele.dk</font></a></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The dinosaurs originated from
diapside reptiles which survived the mass-extinction at the end
of the Permian as swimming archosaurs. From those emerged bipedal
archosaurs, among others two groups of bipedal herbivores, the
short-necked ancestors of the ornitischian dinosaurs, and
long-necked ancestors of the saurischian sauropods. Later emerged
the short-necked meat-eaters, ancestors of the carnosaur
dinosaurs. From a lineage of small bipedal, tree-mounting
bird-ancestors the various groups of bird-like, coelurosaurs
branched off. <br>
The dinosaurs disappeared as a consequence of growth of forests
of deciduous trees.</b></font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>Preword.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">This essay on the origin
and disappearance of the dinosaurs is based on the supposition,
forwarded and argued for in my essay </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/birdweb.htm"><font
color="#FF0000"><b>The Origin of Flapping Flight in Birds</b></font></a><font
color="#FF0000"><b>,</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">*)
that the dinosaurs are offshoots from a lineage which originated
from a group of diapside Permian reptiles leading to the birds.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The source-group of reptiles,
which were very much like the recent reptile <i>Sphenodon</i>,
evolved into birds, the only group of recent bipedal diapsides,
through continuous stages, each stage as for behavioural,
physiological, and anatomical qualities better adapted to live
and breed in the actual environments than the former. Gradually
evolved the characters which are typical for dinosaurs and the
Jurassic pre-bird <i>Archaeopteryx</i>: The elongated jaws with
thecodont teeth and antorbital opening and the bipedal,
narrow-tracked gait. I course of time many offshoots branched off
from this lineage, some of which were the various groups of
dinosaurs. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Dealing with the problem of the
relation of birds to dinosaurs, and of the mutual relation of the
various groups of dinosaurs, one is presented with the problem of
what is dinosaurs. Much time and space could be wasted on that,
and to avoid that, I prefer to call the entire group archosaurs,
and only those, which commonly are called dinosaurs, i.e. the
carnosaurs, the pro-sauropods and the sauropods, and the four
groups of ornitischians for dinosaurs. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The essay does not pretend to be
the TRUTH, but is a proposal of a coherent theory the validity of
which depends on the validity of the basic evidences and of its
consistency, and not if it contradicts other theories or other
interpretations of facts which might be even as valid.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This essay is meant to be
published by the internet, this new medium giving an opportunity
to distribute ideas and theories which hardly could be published
by any magazine. That means that I alone is responsible for the
entire work with no editor nor others to blame for printing- or
other mistakes.</font></p>

<p align="right"><font face="Times New Roman">Ballerup 1998</font></p>

<p align="right"><font face="Times New Roman">Svend Palm. </font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>Introduction.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">The skull of the
dinosaurs is generally characterised by two temporal openings
behind the eye. As this is also a characteristic trait of a group
of Permian diapside reptiles, very little different from the very
unspecialized resent reptile <i>Sphenodon</i>, these reptiles
must be supposed to have been the stem group of the dinosaurs.
The diapside skull is also a characteristic trait of crocodiles,
pterosaurs, and <i>Archaeopteryx</i>, and like the dinosaurs
these also have the particular opening in front of the eye, the
antorbital opening, and they have a single row of teeth in caves
of the jaw, the thecodont dentition. These traits are a general
characteristic of the <b>archosaurs</b> to which also belong
quadrupedal reptiles from the Triassic, the phytosaurs and the
aëtosaurs. The archosaurs therefore emanated from the same
diapside source group.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The narrow gait is a general
characteristic of many archosaurs, and bipedallity is the general
trait of birds and more groups of dinosaurs. </font></p>

<p align="left"><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs are
distinguished in two main groups, the ornitischians and the
saurischians, each characterised by a particular structure of
pelvis and dentition.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">These two groups of dinosaurs are
further distinguished in various groups, each by its own
characteristics. See Fig. </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig1.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">1, C. D</font></a><font face="Times New Roman">.
and fig.</font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig3.gif"><font
color="#FF0000"> 3., C. D.</font></a><font face="Times New Roman">
</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Obviously the origin of the
antorbital opening, the thecodont teeth, the narrow trackway and
bipedallity, the different pelvic structure as well as all the
other characteristics of the various groups of dinosaurs, are due
to a different manner of life of their ancestors. Thus the
ancestors of the saurischian dinosaurs must have lived
differently from the ancestors of the ornitischians, and the
ancestors of the four-footed, long-necked sauropods must have
lived differently from those of the two-footed theropods. And the
forefathers of the heavy, short-necked carnosaurs surely had
different manners of life than those of the light, long-necked
coelurosaurs. Also must the ancestors of the two-legged
ornithopods with three toes at each foot have a fundamental
different manner of life from the ancestors of the four-legged
ceratopians, stegosaurs and ankylosaurs with five toes at each
foot. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">In the following is proposed a
sketchy explanation of what caused the difference of general
structure of the various groups of dinosaurs and, as a
consequence, a proposal of their mutual relations and their
extinction.</font></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>The previous history.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs emerged in
the Triassic. During the previous Permian period a multitude of
vertebrates had arisen, among those the mammalian ancestors and
some lizard-like diapside reptiles, not much different from <i>Sphenodon</i>.
See Fig. </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig2.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">2, A.</font></a></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">During the Permian the climate
was generally warm and dry, and by the end of the period it grew
that warm and dry that vast parts of the earth was desert. Many
species were extinct, and at the beginning of the Triassic only a
few survived. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Among the survivors were some of
the diapside reptiles which could seek shelter from sun and heat
under rocks, searching food at dawn and after sunset, when the
temperatures were endurable. From those reptiles the modern
lizards and snakes arose. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">In the Early Triassic, when the
climate became lesser dry and plants began to spread, another
group of the lizard-like diapsides evolved into the plant-eating
rhynchosaurs, of which many species emerged. They were rather
tall, clumsy reptiles, and they disappeared before the end of the
Mesozoic period.</font></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>The dinosaur origin.<br>
</b></font><font face="Arial"><b><i>The swimming diapsides.<br>
</i></b></font><font face="Times New Roman">Other diapside
reptiles survived by staying at the waters. They lived on fishes
and swam by waving the tail. As an adaptation to this manner of
life their jaws were elongated in order to hold the nostrils out
of the water, which caused the antorbital opening. As a help to
catch and hold fishes in the water they also evolved the solid
thecodont dentition. Fig. </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig1.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">1B</font></a><font face="Times New Roman">, </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig2.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">2B</font></a><font face="Times New Roman">.</font></p>

<p><font face="Arial"><b><i>The archosaurs.<br>
</i></b></font><font face="Times New Roman">On dry land the
diapside reptiles originally moved in the same sprawling manner
as lizards, with extended limbs out from the side of the body,
and they moved them in horizontal swings, waving the body from
side to side. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">But when they swam, they used to
hold the limbs close to the body in order to minimise the
resistance of the water, and when they went out of water to stay
on the banks, they eventually kept the thighs and knees close to
the flanks. And they walked by swinging the lower parts of the
hind legs vertically with the feet beneath the body. They thus
evolved a narrow trackway which enabled them to walk on the hind
legs alone balancing the forepart of the body by the heavy,
muscular tail. Fig. </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig2.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">2, B. C.</font></a></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This gait proved advantageous as
it does not demand as much muscular efforts as the sprawling
manner of walking, and it caused a general change of the original
breast- and pelvic-skeleton: As the forelegs were relieved from
the burden of the body, the breast-skeleton, apt for the strong
musculature of a four-legged, sprawling reptile, was reduced
except in birds where it is a support for the flight-musculature.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The pelvis consisted of the iliac
bone, which was attached to the spine by a few vertebrae, the
pubic bone, which was connected to the iliac bone and directed
forwards, and the iscium, which was directed backwards. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The bipedal, narrow-tracked gait,
in which the pelvis alone should carry the entire burden of the
body, needed, however, more vertebrates to attach the spine to
the iliac bone, and consequently this was elongated. The bipedal
gait also caused that the muscles, which in the quadrupedal
diapsides had pulled the sideways extended thighs downwards, now
should pull the forward extended thighs down- and hindwards and
carry the entire body-weight. As these muscles are attached to
the pubic bones, these were elongated and bend downwards in order
to reinforce these muscles. This structure of the pelvis with the
long ilium and the long, downwards directed pubis is also a
characteristic of the bipedal archosaurs and the saurischian
dinosaurs.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">As a consequence of the bipedal,
narrow-tracked gait, the archosaurs could develop long hind legs,
and later on some of them also lifted the heels off the ground to
became digitigrade, which changed the ankle-joint into a simple
hinge.</font> <font face="Times New Roman">See fig.</font><font
color="#FF0000"> </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig3.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">3</font></a></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>The dinosaurs.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">In the Triassic the
climate became more humid, and the plants began to spread. And
the bipedal archosaurs followed as they diversified into many
species, some as plant-eaters and some as carnivores. Many of
these archosaurs, however, soon gave up the bipedal walking and
supported the forepart of the body on their forelimbs and thus
reassumed the quadrupedal gait. These four-footed archosaurs, the
phytosaurs and the aëtosaurs, many of which were covered with
bony plates and spikes, were rather tallish, but far from the
size of the later dinosaurs. The crocodiles are likely to have
originated from such quadrupedal archosaurs, which have reassumed
the swimming manner.</font></p>

<p><font face="Arial"><b><i>The ornitischian.<br>
</i></b></font><font face="Times New Roman">As the earth was
grown with plants, some of the bipedal archosaurs supplied their
carnivore diet with plants and eventually became plant-eaters.
The foliage trees did not yet exist, and a sort of trees, which
were abundant, was ferns and the 2 - 3 meter tall, palm-like
cycads, and to reach the sappiest shoots of these trees some of
the bipedal archosaurs attained the habit of raising the forepart
of the body to a steeple angel, turning the thigh as long to the
rear as possible, almost perpendicular to the spine. As an
adaptation to his habit, their iliac-bone, which attached the
pelvis to the spine, was further elongated, and the
downward-directed pubic-bone was bend in behind and came to lie
parallel to the ischium. This reinforce the muscles which pull
the thighs in behind and maintain the steeple position. See </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig3.gif"><font
color="#FF0000">fig. 3, </font></a><font color="#FF0000">D</font><font
face="Times New Roman">.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">To adapt further as plant-eaters
they evolved front teeth in the upper-jaw and a tooth-less
&quot;pre-jaw&quot; at the lower jaw, which made them better apt
to bite plants off. Eventually their back teeth were changed to
be fit for chewing plants, thus improving their digestion. Thus
did the ornitischian group of dinosaurs arise, and as an
improvement of their ability to walk, the pubic-bone evolved a
forward branch, almost parallel to the ilium.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The bipedal ornitischians.<br>
</b>The original group of bipedal ornitischians supported on the
entire sole of their five-toed foot, but gradually they evolved
digitigrady, and the number of toes was reduced to three. This
group, the <b>ornithopodes</b>, evolved into many species. In the
Cretaceous many new kinds of plants arose, and many ornithopods
arose which were adapted to eat this plants. A group of
ornithopods, the Hadrosaurs had rather broad mouths without front
teeth, and most of them developed spectacular crests on the top
of the head. The purpose of these ornaments is hard to explain,
but their close connection to the nasal passage points to a site
for olfactory sense. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The quadrupedal ornitischians.<br>
</b><b><i>The stegosaurs and the ankylosaurs.<br>
</i></b>Some of the ornitischians specialised in eating lower
parts of the plants and gave up the habit of raising the body.
Instead they supported the forepart of their body on the
forelimbs and retained a quadrupedal manner of walking. They did
not evolve digitigrady and maintained the five toes at each foot.
Those were the <b>stegosaurs</b> and the <b>ankylosaurs</b> which
were provided with bony knots on the back. The stegosaurs had
bony spears and vertical bony plates along the back, and the
ankylosaurs had bony plates which covered the neck and back
almost as a shield. It seems reasonably that this was evolved to
protect these low creatures against tall carnivores. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b><i>The ceratopians. <br>
</i></b>The four-footed <b>ceratopians</b> originated from
bipedal ornitischians which had acquired digitigrady, but gave up
the bipedallity before the number of five toes at each food was
reduced. They evolved a big bone collar which covered the neck,
and they are generally characterised by tall bony horns
projecting from the front of the head in a rhinoceros fashion.
This was surely a protection they had acquired after they had
reassumed the quadrupedal manner of walking. </font></p>

<p><font face="Arial"><b><i>The saurischians.<br>
</i></b></font><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The quadrupedal
sauropods.<br>
</b>Instead of raising at their hind legs to reach high parts of
the plants as the ornitischians did, another group of bipedal
plant-eating archosaurs evolved a long neck. Thus they maintained
the original structure of pelvis with the pubic-bone pointing
forward and downward. See fig.</font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig2.gif"><font
color="#FF0000"> 2, D</font></a><font face="Times New Roman">.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">They evolved a peculiar manner of
digesting: Instead of chewing their food, they swallowed stones
which grinded the vegetable parts in their stomach. This manner
of digestion is to be found in birds.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">These long-necked archosaurs soon
gave up the bipedal manner of walking and supported the forepart
of the body on the forelimbs, and they became the four-footed <b>sauropods.
</b>They never acquired digitigrady and maintained the five toes
at each foot.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">As four-legged plant-eaters with
the narrow gait, they could assume gigantic size.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">They evolved very long tail as a
flexible balance to the long neck, but it might also have been
useful as a gigantic whip for protection.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The bipedal theropods.<br>
</b><b><i>The carnosaurs.<br>
</i></b>As the plants were abundant and many herbivores arose,
plant-eating archosaurs as well as the plant-eating rhynchosaurs,
there was basis for carnivores to establish, and some of the
bipedal archosaurs took advantage of this. The short-necked <i>Ornithosuchus
</i>of Triassic is surely such an early carnivore archosaur.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">They hardly chased to kill, but
lurked about, and their main course was most likely dead,
weakened, or damaged herbivore ornitischians and sauropods. As
these tall victims had a thick and though hide, and as long,
strong and sharp teeth were necessary to bite through that, and
as long teeth demand tall jaws with strong muscles, the
carnivore, bipedal archosaurs got big heads on large bodies. They
became the tall carnivore <b>carnosaurs. </b></font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The carnosaurs moved bipedal at
the hind legs and evolved digitigrady. The number of toes was
reduced into three toes at each foot. Their forelimbs, which they
did not use for walking, were reduced and became extremely small.
The famous carnosaur <i>Tyrannosaurus rex</i>, as big as an
elephant, had forelimbs only the size of a man&#146;s arm. But
the small forelimbs, which in <i>Tyrannosaurus </i>had only two
fingers with sharp claws, had a strong musculature and were not
totally reduced, most likely because they were necessary when the
big, heavy male mounted the female to mate.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b><i>The coelurosaurs.<br>
</i></b>At an early stage some long-necked plant-eating
archosaurs, ancestors of the long-necked sauropods, added small
living prey to their vegetable diet, and their long legs and long
necks made them fit for fast moving and rapid snatching. Their
sharp-pointed, thecodont teeth, evolved for fish-eating, were
also advantageous for them as ground-living predators, and they
evolved digitigrady and long metatarsals. These bipedal predators
evolved into numerous species which never became especially tall,
but rather agile. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">At an early stage, before the
original breast-skeleton was yet not reduced, some very small
ones of these bipedal, long-necked archosaurs initiated the habit
of climbing tree-trunks to stay in the tree-crowns. Those were
the birds&#146; ancestors, the pro-avians.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The tree-mounting pro-avians.<br>
</b>The trees, which the pro-avians used to climb, were not
branched trees like present day trees, but palm-like cycads the
flat crowns of which was suited for the small bipedal archosaurs
to lay their eggs. Here they were in safe from egg-robbers, and
their hatchlings, which were endangered by predators on the
ground, were reasonably in secure.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The pro-avians performed
tree-mounting by step-by-step walking, hooking by the claws while
clinging to the trunk by the claws of their outstretched
forelimbs. See fig.</font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig4.gif"><font
color="#FF0000"> 4.</font></a></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This use of the forelimbs
demanded strong efforts of the pectoral musculature, and
therefore the pectoral skeleton was not reduced as in the other
bipedal archosaurs, but was maintained and developed. And as an
adaptation to the tree-mounting behaviour, their fore-limbs were
elongated and transformed into three-fingered hands with sharp
claws and wrists to flex to the rear only in the lateral plane.
This fore-limb structure, which is found in birds as the skeletal
framework of the wings, is also to be found in the later
coelurosaurs. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">As the ultimate adaptation to the
tree-mounting behaviour the pro-avians evolved the flying
capacity and became the birds.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b><i>The life in the
tree-crowns.<br>
</i></b>The laying of eggs in the crowns of the cycads gave the
small pro-avians and their hatchlings a great advantage, but also
a disadvantage as they were exposed to sun heating with little
possibility to seek shadow and in great danger of overheating. As
a means to stay as long as possible in the safe place of the
tree-top, their small knobbed scales evolved into a plumage,
which yielded some protection against the rays of the sun, and as
a means to reduce the body-temperature they evolved air sacs
connected with the lungs to cool when they breathed.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Besides they were forced to
assume the optimal body-temperature of 42<sup>o</sup> C. which,
however, was disadvantageous when they seeked food in shady,
cooler places on the ground. To maintain the high optimal
body-temperature they increased their metabolic rate to produce
body-heating and thus acquired the ability to maintain a constant
body-temperature and became warm-blooded.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman"><b>The bird-like coelurosaurs.<br>
</b>The agile, warm-blooded pro-avians split into may species,
and many of these eventually abandoned the tree-mounting manner
to live solely on the ground as bipedal creatures. The
breast-musculature, which was maintained for tree-mounting, was
then reduced, the more reduced, the more time elapsed from giving
up tree-climbing. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Those defectors from the
bird&#146;s lineage are the very bird-like coelurosaurs, most of
which have reduced the breast-skeleton, but some, <i>Oviraptor</i>
and <i>Velociraptor</i> have retained a part of the clavicle.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The long three-fingered hands
with the sharp claws, the longer the more close the coelurosaurs
were to the birds before they abandoned the tree-climbing
manners, were retained for other purposes despite of the peculiar
construction of the wrists.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">As these offshoots from the avian
lineage no more needed to climb, they could be taller, and they
split into many species of various size, all with the shape of
theropod dinosaurs, though they were more lightly built and
long-necked, and generally more bird-like of appearance. The
descendants of those which gave up the climbing at an early stage
were lesser bird-like than those which did it at later, and they
had yet not evolved the long hands and fingers. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The middle-sized <i>Coelophysis,</i>
<i>Saltopus</i> and <i>Procompsognatus</i> from the end of
Triassic are surely descendants of early offshoots from the
bird&#146;s lineage. Those which gave up the climbing behaviour
later in the bird-evolution, were much more bird-like. The small,
feathered <i>Archaeopteryx</i> from Jurassic with its long tail
and toothed mouth was surely a close pro-avian offshoot which had
not yet reduced the fused clavicles and breastbone, whereas the
small <i>Compsognatus</i> of Jurassic were an earlier and more
distant pro-avian offshoot. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The very bird-like coelurosaurs
from the Late Jurassic and Cretaceous, the toothless
ornithomimosaurs, such as <i>Struthiomimus</i>, <i>Gallimimus</i>,
and <i>Ornithomimus</i> are descendants from late, more distant
pro-avian offshoots which had adopted a running, plant-eating
manner of life. The deinonychosaurs, among those <i>Deinonychosaurus</i>,
<i>Dromaeosaurus</i>, <i>Velociraptor</i>, <i>Ornitholestes</i>, <i>Oviraptor</i>
and other very bird-like coelurosaurs with teeth and sharp claws,
and long forelimbs and hands with a very bird-like structure of
the wrist, are surely descendants of late off-shoots from
pro-avians which had taken up a running, meat-eating manner of
life. The large, sharp scythe-shaped claw on the second toe,
which <i>Deinonychosaurus</i> and others were furnished with,
most likely served as a means to cut the tough skin and carve the
meat of a fallen prey. </font></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>Dinosaurs&#146; mutual
relations.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs originate
from a Triassic group of reptiles, the archosaurs, which had
elongated jaws with thecodont dentition and antorbital opening.
Many archosaurs had a narrow-tracked gait and a bipedal manner of
walking.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">From those arose short-necked and
the long-necked herbivores.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The short-necked ones had a
general change of the pelvis, and a dentition apt to chew the
food. They became the ornitischian dinosaurs which split up in
the ornithopodes, which remained bipedal, whereas the stegosaurs
and ankylosaurs soon assumed quadrupedality, and the ceratopsians
did it later on.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The long-necked herbivore were
ancestors of the tallish, bipedal prosauropods, some of which
were the ancestors of the huge quadrupedal sauropods. Some early
ancestors of the long-necked herbivores were also the root of the
bird-lineage, the long-necked, light-builded pro-avians. From the
lineage of pro-avians the early coelurosaurs branched off, and
eventually the ornithomisaurs and deinonychosaurs defected from
the bird-lineage.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">From the bipedal archosaurs the
tall, short-necked meat-eating carnosaurs emanated separately.
See fig.</font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/grafic/dinfig5.gif"><font
color="#FF0000"> 5.</font></a></p>

<p><font size="4" face="Arial"><b>The dinosaurs&#146; extinction.<br>
</b></font><font face="Times New Roman">As for the extinction of
the dinosaurs the only solid fact is that no trace of dinosaur
has been found after the Cretaceous. This calls for ideas of
their sudden disappearance, and a great numbers of theories have
been proposed, many of which with a preference for the dramatic. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">It should be emphasise, however,
that their is no reason to think that the dinosaurs disappeared
suddenly. And there is neither any reason to think that they
disappeared because they all died! All animals die, but
extinction happens because lesser new are born than die.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs were a very great
success and the superiors of their time with no competition from
other vertebrates. The mammals, which did exist during the entire
dinosaurian period, were small nocturnal animals which played
only little or no role to the dinosaurs. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">At the beginning of the Triassic
various other groups of reptiles, which had survived the great
extinction, took their place in the ecological system of the
Mesozoic. Those were the diapside reptiles which evolved into the
quadrupedal, sprawling lizards, and the herbivore rhynchosaurs,
but the former stayed small, and the latter were slow, clumsy
animals which died out during the Mesozoic. The birds arose
during the reign of the dinosaurs, and also did the flying
reptiles, the pterosaurs, but non of these met the dinosaurs with
any kind of competition, neither did the amphibian archosaurs,
phytosaurs and crocodiles, and nor the various species of
sea-living reptiles, the ichthyosaurs and the plesiosaurs. From
the Middle Triassic the stage was entirely set for the dinosaurs,
and they constituted almost exclusively an eco-system of their
own. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This system was based on the tall
plant-eaters, the sauropods, the various ornitischians, and
eventually on the bird-like, plant-eating ornithomimians. These
plant-eaters drifted in hosts over the landscapes and consummated
enormous amounts of plants, which they transformed into enormous
amounts of meat. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">These hosts of plant-eaters were
escorted by the meat-eaters, the tall carnosaurs and the lesser
bird-like coelurosaurs which profitated from the vast amounts of
meat to be served when a tall plant-eater died, fell ill, or was
wounded. Occasionally they might have attached and killed a prey,
presumably young or invalid ones which could be overtaken, but
there is no reason to imagine the meat-eating dinosaurs as
active, chasing predators. More likely they should be imagined as
scavengers, equipped with large teeth and sharp claws for cutting
through thick and tough hide and for carving the meat, rather
than for killing a living prey. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs owed their
superiority to the narrow gait which they had achieved from the
swimming and bipedal ancestral archosaurs. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This gait made them able to
evolve long legs and to move in a manner which demands much
lesser energy than the original sprawling gait and the
semi-improved gait of the pre-mammals. Besides it made them able
to acquire large size. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Due to this superiority the
dinosaurs in general did not need to evolve neither essential
physiological improvements nor essential improvements of senses
and breeding as did the contemporary mammals. Some dinosaurian
species might have improved their digestion and have developed a
higher metabolic rate with some degree of endothermy, and some
might have attained some kind of youth-care. And it is the most
likely the bird-like coelurosaurs of Late Jurassic and
Cretaceous, defectors from the bird-lineage, were warm-blooded
and had a rather high metabolism as well as an advanced activity.
But in general the dinosaurs remained reptiles with low
metabolism and low activity-level, and with humble ability to
orientate. Their ability to recognise objects of their
surroundings were surely poor and confined to eye-sight, and only
to a very small degree to hearing. The ornamental crests in the
late ornithopods may have given these some ability to orientate
by smelling, but there is in general no reason to think of the
dinosaurs as particular active and agile, not to say intelligent,
and no more than any modern reptile or bird. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">During the Mesozoic the dinosaurs
evolved into a great number of species, each adapted to its
niche, and by the end of Cretaceous the entire dinosaurian world
was one great, complicated, delicate ecosystem. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">Their generally tall size,
compared to other animals of their time, and their long legs
confined the dinosaurs to the open, flat, and firm lands, and -
like the modern tall, long-legged plain-living mammals - unsuited
for rocks, swamps, and dense forests. During the greater part of
Mesozoic the latter was, however, no disadvantage as the herds of
plant-eating dinosaurs on their all-consummating wanderings over
the landscapes bit down all green plants and prevented any dense,
tall vegetation to grow.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurian world was based
on the herds of tall plant-eaters which lived mostly on ferns and
conifers, which trees cannot stand to have the green parts bitten
off. So when a host of dinosaurs had passed, the ground was left
with bare, dying, and crushed trunks and heaps of dung. Then new
plants could grow up until the next herd of plant-eating
dinosaurs came along, followed by their meat-eating companions. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">But in the Cretaceous the foliage
plants and the foliage trees evolved. These plants could stand to
have the green leaves bitten off; they grew new foliage and grew
on. Thus great areas eventually became forest, and the space for
the dinosaurs was gradually reduced. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">The dinosaurs did not die from
this, but the balance of the ecosystem was upset, and the number
of plant-eaters decreased, slowly at the beginning, faster later
on as the forests extended. This further minimised the space for
the dinosaurs which decreased, and so on to an increasing degree.
By the end of Cretaceous the entire eco-system collapsed. Due to
their specialisation as plain-dwellers with restricted physiology
and senses the dinosaurs were unable to adapt themselves to the
new situation. In a relatively short time they disappeared,
leaving the earth to be covered with forest.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">This had its consequences: The
amount of carbon-dioxide, CO<sub>2</sub>, in the atmosphere is
lesser than 1%, but the plants live on it and tie it as
cellulose, thereby removing it from the atmosphere. But as the
herds of dinosaurs eat almost any plant, the tied CO<sub>2 </sub>was
released to the atmosphere all the time. But when the forests
began to spread, the great amounts of tied CO<sub>2 </sub>were no
more released, and the CO<sub>2</sub>-amount of the atmosphere
decreased.</font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">In the sea, the algae also
depended on the CO<sub>2.</sub> During Cretaceous enormous
amounts of CO<sub>2</sub> were consummated by the algae which
tied it and disposed it as chalk. But as the increasing forests
tied still larger amounts of CO<sub>2</sub> and the atmospheric
amount of CO<sub>2</sub> fell, the algae of the sea decreased
which upset the ecological balance of the sea too: The algae were
food for other sea-organisms, which were food for fishes and
other see-animals, which also decreased, why the lope-finned
fishes and the see-reptiles, ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, mesosaurs
ect. consequently disappeared. </font></p>

<p><font face="Times New Roman">These factors, and surely many
others, brought the world of the dinosaurs to an end, leaving a
world covered with foliated forests, and the possibility for the
small, warm-blooded mammals to evolve.</font></p>

<p align="center"><font face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font
size="4" face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font size="5"
face="Times New Roman">* </font><font size="4"
face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font face="Times New Roman">*
*</font></p>

<p><font size="2" face="Times New Roman">*)As most readers with
interest for the subject are supposed to be familiar with
relevant evidences, this essay deliberately is not garnished with
numerous references.<br>
Only for the proposal of the pro-avian lineage should be refered
the author&#146;s small book, Palm, Svend, (1997) </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/birdweb.htm"><font
color="#FF0000" size="2"><b>The Origin of Flapping Flight in
Birds</b></font><font size="2" face="Times New Roman"><b>.</b></font></a><font
size="2" face="Times New Roman"> Ballerup. (ISBN 87 - 986364 - 0
- 5). As for the question of dinosaurs warm-bloodedness is
refered to Palm, Svend, (1997)</font><font color="#FF0000"
size="2"> </font><a
href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/warmweb.htm"><font
color="#FF0000" size="2"><b>The Warm-blooded Dinosaurs?</b></font></a><font
size="2" face="Times New Roman"><b> </b>Ballerup. (ISBN 87 -
986710 - 0 - 6). Each can be required by E-mail:</font><a
href="mailto:palm@post7.tele.dk"><font color="#FF0000" size="2">
palm@post7, tele.dk.</font></a></p>

<p align="center"><font face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font
size="4" face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font size="5"
face="Times New Roman">* </font><font size="4"
face="Times New Roman">* * </font><font face="Times New Roman">*
*</font></p>
<div align="center"><center>

<table border="5" width="200" bgcolor="#00FFFF"
bordercolor="#FF0000" bordercolordark="#808080"
bordercolorlight="#C0C0C0">
    <tr>
        <td><p align="center"><a
        href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk./palm/dincom.htm"><font
        color="#0000FF" size="5" face="Arial"><strong>Comments
        and questions to Dinosaur Origin and Extinction.</strong></font></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</center></div>

<p align="center">F<font face="Times New Roman">ebruary 2000.</font></p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td bgcolor="#00FFFF"><a
        href="http://home13.inet.tele.dk/palm/"><font
        color="#FF0000" face="Verdana"><strong>Go to Homepage</strong></font></a></td>
    </tr>
</table>
<!-- den nedenstående kode er indsat automatisk af TDC Internet for at måle trafikken på siderne. Målingen foregår således at brugeren garanteres 100% anonymitet. Denne kode må ikke sættes ud af funktion, kopieres, eller ændres. Læs mere om opasias hjemmesider på http://internet.opasia.dk/hjemmeside/ . -->

<!-- START RedMeasure V4 --><script type="text/javascript"><!--

function measurePage() {
        var refR=escape(document.referrer);
        if (refR.length>=252) refR=refR.substring(0,252)+"...";
        var postReq='<img src="http:\/\/server-dk.imrworldwide.com\/cgi-bin\/count?cid=dk_TeleFanten_0&amp;ref='+refR+'&amp;rnd='+(new Date()).getTime()+'" width="1" height="1" alt="">';
        if (window == top) {
                document.write(postReq);
        }
}
measurePage();

//--></script><!-- END RedMeasure V4 -->
</body>
</html>

