ID=H0184
URL=http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/molgen/
SIZE=135888
DATE=11/07/2002
TIME=17:02:30
DATASET=Biology
HTML=<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
<meta name="description"
content="New evidence from molecular geneticists joins with the immense body of clues from other disciplines which collectively provide overwhelming evidence for evolution." />
<title>Plagiarized Errors and Molecular Genetics</title>
<meta name="keywords"
content="evolution, creationism, molecular genetics, DNA, pseudogenes, retroposons, endogenous retroviruses, phylogeny, errors, plagiarized errors, junk DNA, SINE, LINE" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/styles/main.css"
type="text/css" />
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/pictures/to.ico" />
<meta name="classification" content="Science Education" />
<meta name="robots" content="index, follow" />
<meta name="rating" content="Safe for Kids" />
<meta name="copyright"
content="Article &copy; 1986-2002 by Edward Max, site and HTML coding &copy; 1998-2002 by The Talk.Origins Archive" />
</head>
<body>
<!-- begin header -->
<div><map name="headermap" id="headermap">
<area shape="rect" coords="159,63,254,99"
href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="Browse" />
<area shape="rect" coords="255,63,353,99"
href="/origins/search.html" alt="Search" />
<area shape="rect" coords="354,63,451,99"
href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="Feedback" />
<area shape="rect" coords="452,63,548,99"
href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="Other Links" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,0,158,99" href="/"
alt="Home" />
<area shape="rect" coords="159,0,559,62" href="/"
alt="Home" />
</map></div>

<center>
<div><a href="/scripts/imagemap/header.map"><img
src="/pictures/header.gif" usemap="#headermap" width="560"
height="100" border="0" alt="The Talk.Origins Archive"
ismap="ismap" /></a><br />
 <br />
 

<h1 class="plus2">Plagiarized Errors and Molecular
Genetics</h1>

<h2 class="plus1">Another argument in the
evolution-creation controversy</h2>

<address class="plus0">by <a
href="mailto:max@cber.fda.gov">Edward E. Max, M.D.,
Ph.D.</a></address>

<div class="minus1">Copyright &copy; 1986-2002</div>

<div class="minus1">Last Update: March 19, 2002]</div>

<p><img src="/pictures/thicksep.gif" alt="" width="560"
height="10" /></p>
</div>
</center>

<!-- end header -->
<center style="width:60%">
<p><small>The following essay is an updating of an article
I published in <i>Creation/Evolution</i> in 1986 (XIX,
p.34). I am posting it with permission from
<i>Creation/Evolution</i>.</small></p>
</center>

<h2>1. Introduction</h2>


<table border="0" class="grey" cellpadding="10" summary=""
width="40%" align="right">
<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Other Links:</b></p>

<dl>
<dt><small><a
href="http://www.cs.unc.edu/~plaisted/ce/junk.html">Shared
Errors in the DNA of Humans and Apes</a></small></dt>

<dd><small>Creationist David A. Plaisted argues that shared
DNA sequences in the pseudogenes of different species don't
necessarily indicate evolution.</small></dd>

<dt><small><a href="/faqs/molgen/plaisted.html">Edward Max
responds to Plaisted</a></small></dt>

<dd><small>The author of this essay has written a response
to Plaisted.</small>
<p><small>In a posting at the creationist Website "Answers
in Genesis," Carl Wieland disputed the idea that shared
pseudogenes represent evidence for evolution.</small></p>
</dd>

<dt><small><a href="/faqs/molgen/wieland.html">Edward Max
responds to Wieland</a></small></dt>

<dd><small>The author of this essay wrote a response to
Wieland. Subsequently Wieland withdrew his
posting.</small></dd>

<dt><small> </small></dt>

<dt><small><a
href="http://www.answersingenesis.org/Home/Area/Magazines/tj/docs/tj14_3-jw_pseudo.pdf">
Are pseudogenes "shared mistakes" between primate
genomes?</a></small></dt>

<dd><small>Creationist "John Woodmorappe" has written a
long essay (with 152 references) arguing against the
conclusions presented here. In his essay, Woodmorappe
focuses on rare exceptions to the general principles
outlined in my essay, while ignoring the vast amount of
evidence supporting those principles (see section 5.8
below). A careful examination of Woodmorappe's references
shows that many of them do not support the conclusions he
claims they do. He has rehashed many of the false arguments
that I have already rebutted in section 5. And he has
raised irrelevant points insinuating that they somehow
weaken the case for evolution, which they do not. In short,
none of Woodmorappe's arguments make a convincing case
against the conclusions of my essay. Futhermore, despite
his criticisms of almost every point I have made,
Woodmorappe fails to offer an explicit alternative
interpretation of the data I have discussed. I hope to
respond to the Woodmorappe essay in more detail in a future
rebuttal that will be linked here.</small></dd>

</dl>
</td>
</tr>
</table>


 

<p><img src="/pictures/letters/M.gif" alt="M"
width="53" height="45"
align="left" />ost scientists regard the evidence for
evolution as overwhelming. Thus, in their conviction that
evolution has already been thoroughly and sufficiently
documented, they sometimes fail to consider how new
discoveries might provide evidence for evolution that might
be powerfully persuasive to individuals leaning towards
creationist beliefs. In this article, I describe some
discoveries from my own field of molecular genetics,
discoveries whose implication for the creation-evolution
controversy were not explicitly discussed when they were
reported. I try to show how they provide evidence for
evolution that is both convincing and conceptually simple
enough for the interested layperson to appreciate.</p>

<p>The new molecular evidence bears on a question which, in
my opinion, represents one of the few cases in which a
creationist argument had demonstrated logical consistency
and had fought the evolutionary position to a deadlock.
This is the question of how to interpret the similarities
between modern living species, especially the similarities
observed at the molecular level. As we will see, the recent
discoveries from molecular genetics resolve this deadlock
unequivocally in favor of evolution.</p>

<h3>1.1 The evolutionary view of species similarities</h3>

<p>Consider first how evolutionists interpret similarities
between species living today. Present-day humans and
chimpanzees, despite obvious external and behavioral
differences, have extremely similar internal organs and
physiological functions; indeed their genes are more than
98% identical (Goodman et al., J Molec Evolution
30:260,1990). Just as the resemblance between two siblings
suggests a common parentage, resemblance between species
suggests common ancestors. Evolutionists believe that
humans, gorillas, and chimpanzees evolved from a common
ancestor: an ape-like creature that lived perhaps five to
ten million years ago, rather recently on the geological
time scale. (The thought that humans and apes might share a
common ancestor seems particularly unacceptable to
creationists because of the theological implications of
such a relationship and the clear contradiction to the
creationists' literal interpretation of biblical Genesis.)
Species less similar to humans than are apes--mice, for
example--are believed to have branched off millions of
years earlier from a common primitive mammalian ancestor.
Evolutionary family tree diagrams that express such
relationships between species have been constructed by
evolutionary biologists by analyzing similarities of
present-day organisms. In many cases, fossilized remains of
extinct species can be used to support the features of such
evolutionary trees; fossil evidence will not, however, be
discussed in this article.</p>

<p>Another extensive source of data that has been of major
importance in constructing similarity tree diagrams is the
species comparison of proteins and genes. Proteins are
large biological molecules made of subunits called amino
acids that are attached to one another in chains, like the
cars of a train. There are twenty different kinds of amino
acids used in proteins, and most proteins contain hundreds
of these subunits. Each protein has a specific number and
sequence of amino acids, and this sequence determines what
properties that protein will have. In order for a cell to
synthesize a specific protein, it must access an
"information bank" in which amino acid sequences are
stored; this information bank is comprised of the
organism's genes, which contain the amino acid sequences
encoded in molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
Biochemists can purify proteins and learn the exact
sequence of their amino acids, or they can obtain this
information by reading the appropriate sequence from an
organism's DNA. Considerable effort has gone into comparing
the sequences of similar proteins isolated from different
species. For example, one protein called "cytochrome c" has
been examined in more than eighty species. These cytochrome
c amino acid sequences represent "digital" bits of data
that can be used to quantify differences between species,
and these differences can be used to construct evolutionary
trees much like those based on comparisons of "analog"
features of body anatomy. Such protein sequence trees--as
well as trees based upon DNA structure similarities--agree
remarkably well with the evolutionary trees derived earlier
from anatomic similarities. The agreement of evolutionary
trees constructed from such completely different sorts of
data (e.g. Goodman et al Mol Phylogenet Evol 9:585, 1998)
has been taken by evolutionists as evidence of the validity
of the intellectual framework on which the trees are based:
the theory of evolution (see Jukes, in Scientists Confront
Creationism, edited by Godfrey, WW Norton, New York 1983;
Creation/Evolution XVIII:42, 1986; Goodman et al., J Mol
Evol 30: 260, 1990).</p>

<h3>1.2 The creationist view of species similarities leads
to a deadlock</h3>

<p>However, creationists have an alternative interpretation
of the amino acid sequence similarities reflected in the
evolutionists' trees. They say that such sequence
similarities in "related" species simply reflect the
creator's choice to design similar species to function
similarly, not only at the level of bones, muscles and
organs, but also at the level of protein function--hence
the amino acid sequence similarities.</p>

<p>Thus the similarities between species in anatomy and
protein structure can be interpreted in two entirely
different ways. The evolutionists say that the similarity
between features of, for example, humans and apes reflects
the fact that these features were inherited from a common
ancestor; that is, the similar features of humans and apes
are determined by modern copies of genes that once existed
in species that was ancestral to both apes and humans. The
creationists say that apes and humans were created
independently but were designed with similar features so
that they would function similarly. Both the gene copying
and the independent creation views seem consistent with the
similarity data, but which view is correct?</p>

<h3>1.3 A possible rationale to resolve the deadlock</h3>

<p>One way to distinguish between copying and independent
creation is suggested by analogy to the following two cases
from the legal literature. In 1941 the author of a
chemistry textbook brought suit charging that portions of
his textbook had been plagiarized by the author of a
competing textbook (<i>Colonial Book Co, Inc. v. Amsco
School Publications, Inc</i>., 41 F. Supp.156 (S.D.N.Y.
1941), aff'd 142 F.2d 362 (2nd Cir. 1944)). In 1946 the
publisher of a trade directory for the construction
industry made similar charges against a competing directory
publisher (<i>Sub-Contractors Register, Inc. v McGovern's
Contractors &amp; Builders Manual, Inc</i>. 69 F.Supp. 507,
509 (S.D.N.Y. 1946)). In both cases, mere similarity
between the contents of the alleged copies and the
originals was not considered compelling evidence of
copying. After all, both chemistry textbooks were
describing the same body of chemical knowledge (the books
were designed to "function similarly") and both directories
listed members of the same industry, so substantial
resemblance would be expected even if no copying had
occurred. However, in both cases errors present in the
"originals" appeared in the alleged copies. The courts
judged that it was inconceivable that the same errors could
have been made independently by each plaintiff and
defendant, and ruled in both cases that copying had
occurred. The principle that duplicated errors imply
copying is now well established in copyright law. (In
recognition of this fact, directory publishers routinely
include false entries in their directories to trap
potential plagiarizers.)</p>

<p>Can "errors" in modern species be used as evidence of
"copying" from ancient ancestors? In fact, the answer to
this question appears to be "yes," since recent molecular
genetics investigations have uncovered some examples of the
same "errors" present in the genetic material of humans and
apes. To understand these findings it is necessary to know
a little about DNA, the chemical molecule in which genetic
information is stored.</p>

<h3>2.1 DNA Basics</h3>

<p>In one respect the basic structure of DNA resembles that
of proteins: both are made of linear chains of varying
subunits. Apart from this common feature, DNA structure is
quite different from that of proteins. The subunits in DNA
are called nucleotides or bases, and the sequence of these
nucleotides contains the genetic information specifying the
sequence of amino acids in each protein made by the
organism. Whereas 20 different amino acids comprise the
subunits of proteins, there are only four different
nucleotide bases in DNA, generally abbreviated A, T, G and
C. According to the "genetic code" deduced by scientists in
the 1960s, each amino acid is specified by one or more
triplets of nucleotides; for example, the sequence GCG
specifies the amino acid alanine. Since there are 64
different triplets (each called a codon) and only 20 amino
acids to specify, some amino acids are represented by more
than one triplet (e.g. ATA, ATC and ATT all code for the
amino acid isoleucine); and three triplets -- TAA, TAG and
TGA -- represent "stop codons" that mark the end of the
gene sequence that can be used to specify amino acid
sequence.</p>

<p> </p>

<center>
<table border="0" summary="">
<tr>
<td>
<p><img src="DNA.RNA.protein.4.gif" width="542"
height="462" alt="Figure 1"
align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 1</b>. DNA Basics. The central oval represents
a cell, within which lies the nucleus. Inside the nucleus,
most of the DNA exists as a double helix. The oval at upper
left shows an expanded view of the DNA, in which the
helices have been drawn "untwisted" to reveal similarity to
a ladder. The genetic information is stored in the
sequences of nucleotide bases (A, T, G or C) that form the
rungs of the ladder. Each rung is formed by a pair of
nucleotide bases touching each other, one base attached to
one strand backbone, and the other attached to the other
strand backbone. An "A" nucleotide always pairs with a "T,"
and a "G" always pairs with a "C." In order to synthesize a
protein, the cell reads the genetic information of the gene
for that protein by "transcribing" a molecule of RNA from
the gene. For transcription, the strands of the DNA double
helix must partially separate so that the bases that form
RNA can assemble according to the rules of complementary
basepairing. The expanded view at upper right shows the two
major differences between RNA and DNA: the RNA backbone
strand has a slightly different chemical structure
(represented by the dashed line), and a slightly modified
form of "T" known as "U" is found in RNA. The transcribed
strand of RNA acts as a "messenger" that carries the
genetic information from storage in the nucleus to the
protein manufacturing modules (represented in the figure by
double grey ovals) in the cytoplasm. The expanded view at
lower left shows that the sequence of RNA bases is read so
that each triplet of bases specifies an amino acid (aa1,
aa2, etc.) in the protein. The protein folds into a
functional three-dimensional structure that depends on the
linear sequence of amino acids.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>DNA contains two linear chains in a double-stranded
structure that resembles a twisted ladder--the famous
"double helix." The vertical beams of the ladder represent
a uniform backbone chain which contains no sequence
information. As shown in Figure 1 above, the information is
stored in the "rungs" of the ladder, which are formed from
a pair of nucleotide bases, each sticking out from one
vertical backbone strand and touching the base from the
opposite strand to form a "rung." The base G on one strand
always contacts a base C on the opposite strand; similarly
an A always contacts a T. Thus a string of Ts on one strand
can "basepair" or "anneal" with a strand containing a
string of As to form a double-stranded structure. The
sequence of nucleotide bases in one strand is said to be
"complementary" to the sequence of the other strand. For
any one gene the triplets of bases encoding amino acid
sequence are on only one strand. Some genes are encoded on
one strand, while other genes lie on the other strand. In
most mammalian genes the DNA coding for amino acid
sequences is interrupted by segments of apparently
meaningless DNA ("introns"). Intron sequences need to be
removed before the sequence is used to assemble amino
acids; this removal, or splicing, does not occur in the DNA
molecule, but in the next stage of information
transfer.</p>

<p>In order for a cell to produce a particular protein
whose amino acid sequence is encoded in a gene, the
sequence information in the DNA must first be copied or
"transcribed" into a single-stranded molecule called
ribonucleic acid (RNA), as shown above in Figure 1. This
initial transcript of RNA undergoes several structural
alterations, known collectively as "processing," before it
is used to assemble amino acids. These processing steps
include the "splicing" out of unnecessary intron segments
from the RNA and the addition of nucleotides at one
end--the "poly(A) tail"--which promote proper functioning
of the RNA in the cell. It is the "processed" RNA that
participates directly in the assembly of amino acids into
proteins. The transcription of a gene into an RNA copy is
very tightly controlled, in part by highly specific
regulatory sequences known as promoters that for most genes
occur in the DNA just outside the transcribed region but
close to the position where the transcription into RNA
should start.</p>

<p>When a cell divides, the entire sequence of its DNA must
be duplicated into two faithful copies of the original; one
copy goes to each of the "daughter" cells created by the
division. Occasionally, errors occur in this copying
mechanism, creating "mutations" in the DNA sequence. There
are several types of mutations, including substitutions of
one or a few nucleotides, deletions of nucleotides,
duplication of segments of DNA or insertion of extraneous
DNA segments into an unrelated DNA sequence. Such changes
can occur in most cells in the body--liver, skin, muscle,
etc.--without being transmitted to offspring when the
organism reproduces. However, when mutations occur in the
egg or sperm or, more generally in "germline cells" (i.e.,
the egg or sperm plus their embryological precursors), they
can be passed on to future generations. Often, mutations
are inconsequential: e.g. they may fall outside a gene, or
if within a gene they may not change the amino acid
encoded. Many genetic differences between closely related
species are thought to represent such random
inconsequential mutations. Sometimes, however, mutations
critically damage the function of a gene. Indeed, such
mutations are the cause of genetic diseases like cystic
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, phenylketonuria, and hundreds
of others, as well as many genetic aberrations studied in
laboratory animals. When molecular geneticists examine the
DNA of patients with such well-characterized diseases, they
can almost always find the defective gene and identify the
mutation that inactivated it, since it is rare for such
genetic disease to be caused by a deletion that removes an
entire gene. Mutations causing genetic diseases and
malformations are generally so detrimental to the
organism's survival and reproductive success that in the
wild--i.e. in the absence of modern medical science--they
would tend to be "weeded out" by the pressure of natural
selection. Rarely, mutations can be beneficial to an
organism: these rare cases form the basis for evolutionary
adaptations that improve the "fitness" of an organism to
its environment.</p>

<h3>2.2 DNA errors</h3>

<p>Recombinant DNA technology has in recent years allowed
scientists to determine the sequence of nucleotides in
segments of DNA from many species, and several billion
nucleotides' worth of information has accumulated. These
sequences have vastly increased our understanding of how
genes normally function; but, more to the point of this
article, they have provided a treasure trove of genetic
"errors" that are potential clues to the analysis of
copying discussed earlier. In this context I use the word
"error" to include any DNA feature that we have good reason
to believe (1) originated from a genetic "accident"; (2)
serves no benefit to the organism carrying the features;
and (3) therefore cannot reasonably be interpreted as
having been "designed." I will discuss several overlapping
classes of these "errors," which argue for evolution in
slightly different ways. One class includes "pseudogenes,"
or damaged non-functional copies of genes. I will discuss
three classes of pseudogenes, the last of which overlaps
with another larger category of genetic "errors" known as
retroposons, which will also be discussed. See Figure
2.</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/molgen/fig1.gif" alt="[Fig1]"
width="374" height="202" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 2.</b> This Venn diagram illustrates the
classes of "errors" discussed in this posting, except that
the class of "unitary pseudogenes" (which is really a tiny
subset of "classical pseudogenes") is not shown in the
diagram. Processed pseudogenes represent the intersection
of the set of pseudogenes and the set of retroposons.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<h4>2.2.1 Pseudogenes</h4>

<h5>a. Unitary pseudogenes.</h5>

<p>Guinea pigs and primates, including humans, get sick
unless they consume ascorbic acid in their diet. For humans
and guinea pigs, ascorbic acid is thus a vitamin (vitamin
C), while most other species can synthesize their own
ascorbic acid and thus do not require this molecule in
their diet. The reason humans and guinea pigs cannot
manufacture their own ascorbic acid is that they lack a
functional gene encoding the enzyme protein known as
L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase (GLO), which is required for
synthesizing ascorbic acid. In most mammals functional GLO
genes are present, inherited - according to the
evolutionary hypothesis - from a functional GLO gene in a
common ancestor of mammals. According to this view, GLO
gene copies in the human and guinea pig lineages were
inactivated by mutations. Presumably this occurred
separately in guinea pig and primate ancestors whose
natural diets were so rich in ascorbic acid that the
absence of GLO enzyme activity was not a disadvantage--it
did not cause selective pressure against the defective
gene.</p>

<p>Molecular geneticists who examine DNA sequences from an
evolutionary perspective know that large gene deletions are
rare, so scientists expected that non-functional mutant GLO
gene copies--known as "pseudogenes"--might still be present
in primates and guinea pigs as relics of the functional
ancestral gene. In contrast, Creationists believe that
humans and guinea pigs were each created independently of
all other species and must have been "designed" to function
without GLO. If this were true, these two species would not
be expected to carry a defective copy of the GLO gene. In
fact, GLO pseudogenes have been detected in both guinea
pigs and humans (Nishikimi et al. J Biol Chem 267: 21967,
1992; Nishikimi et al. J Biol Chem 269:13685, 1994),
consistent with the evolutionary view; presumably, related
pseudogenes also exist in non-human primates that require
dietary vitamin C. The kinds of mutations found in the
human and guinea pig pseudogenes are typical of the ones
seen in genetic diseases like those mentioned earlier. In
this essay I call the human and guinea pig GLO DNA
sequences "unitary pseudogenes" to distinguish them from
two other kinds of pseudogene occurring in a species that
also possesses a functional copy of the same gene (see
below). Readers should note that the term "unitary
pseudogene" is used here for convenience; there is no
standard nomenclature to describe this rare type of
pseudogene.</p>

<p>Unitary pseudogenes are relatively rare; each is like a
genetic defect that affects all individuals in a species.
But these defective genes do not correspond to genetic
diseases because if they caused significant symptoms or
other disadvantage to their owners, individuals with intact
genes would have long ago won the competition for survival
and reproduction, thus driving the pseudogene out of
existence. In an evolutionary perspective unitary
pseudogenes represent genetic relics of genes whose
function was important in ancestral species but became
unnecessary in the modern species; i.e. they are vestigial
DNA sequences. The presence of non-functional pseudogene
relics is easily explained by the evolutionary model: they
are a natural consequence of mutations that fail to be
eliminated by natural selection because the function of the
gene product has become unnecessary. In fact, this model
predicts that many unitary pseudogenes should be found if
scientists examine the genes specifying vestigial
structures--for example, genes encoding eye structures in
blind species such as moles or cave-dwellers. (An example
confirming this prediction was recently described in
marsupial moles: an apparent unitary pseudogene related to
the interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein gene
[<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/94/25/13754">Springer 
et al., PNAS 94:13754, 1997</a>]. A conceptually
similar example in human DNA is provided by odorant
receptor DNA sequences: about 70% are of these sequences
are pseudogenes, reflecting the nearly vestigial status of
our olfactory perception in comparison to that of other
species [Rouquier et al., Nat Genet 18:243,1998; Rouquier,
et al. Human Molec Genet &amp;:1337,1998;Sharon et al.,
Genomics 61:24,1999; 
<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/97/6/2870">
Rouquier et al., PNAS 97:2871,2000</a>;
Glusman et al, Genome Res 11:685, 2001].) In contrast, such
pseudogenes would not be expected if each species were
independently created by an intelligent designer (unless
that designer were intentionally simulating evolution).
Several other unitary pseudogenes are known in humans,
including sequences homologous to [i.e, similar to and
thought to be derived from a common ancestor] the genes
encoding urate oxidase (Yeldandi et al, Gene 109:2821,
1994; Wu et al, J Mol Evol 34:78, 1992),
alpha-1,3-galactosyltransferase 
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/16/7401">Galili
and Swanson, PNAS 88:7401,1991</a>) 
and the RT6 surface protein, a
glycophosphatidylinositol-linked ADP-ribosyltransferase
(Haag et al, J Mol Biol 243:537,1994). More may be
discovered as the Human Genome Project advances the
knowledge of our DNA sequence.</p>

<p>(Another interesting group of unitary pseudogenes are
polymorphic sequences that are genes in some individuals
and pseudogenes in others, with differing frequencies of
pseudogenes in various populations. Examples include human
genes for the chemokine receptor CCR5, for the
alpha2-fucosyltransferase Se, for the cytochromes p450 2C19
and p450 2D6, for the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase,
and for the lipoprotein apo(a). For these examples, absence
of the corresponding functional proteins is inconsequential
most of the time, but can become clinically important --
whether beneficial or detrimental -- in certain
environmental circumstances or in combination with other
genes. In some cases the same gene product may be
beneficial in some circumstances and detrimental in others,
so that selection leads to an intermediate gene
frequency.)</p>

<h5>b. Classical duplicated pseudogenes</h5>

<p>A much larger class of pseudogenes apparently arises
from mishaps in a pattern of gene alteration that has been
important in the evolution of normal functional genes: the
pattern of duplication and differentiation (Ohta, Genome
31:304,1989; Holland et al., Dev Suppl 36:125, 1994). This
pattern is evident from the frequent observation (in DNA
from a variety of species) of blocks of sequences that have
apparently been duplicated so that two or more repeats of
similar sequences appear side by side, i.e. in tandem (see
<a href="#box1">box 1</a>).</p>

<p>Presumably, immediately after duplication each gene copy
had an identical sequence. (See Figure 3.) But as DNA
sequences are copied from generation to generation,
mutations can accumulate independently in the duplicated
sequence copies, with several possible consequences.</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/molgen/fig2.gif" alt="[Fig2]"
width="546" height="347" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 3.</b> In normal gene function (left panel),
DNA is transcribed into RNA, which is then "processed" by
the removal of introns (the non-coding sequences between
the gray boxes) and addition of a poly(A) tail. The mature
processed RNA is then translated into a chain of amino
acids to form a protein. The right panels illustrate the
two pathways generating the classical duplicated pseudogene
(top) and processed pseudogene (bottom). In the top
pathway, DNA duplication generates two copies of the entire
gene (upper right box), but mutations in one copy
(represented by the "x"s) render it a pseudogene. In the
other pathway a processed RNA transcript of a gene can
become reverse transcribed into a cDNA copy (lower right
box) that inserts back into cell's DNA at a random position
in the genome, usually--as shown here--in the spacer DNA
between genes (white boxes in the Figure).</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>i. Some mutations may have no effect on the functioning
of the gene. <a id="box1" name="box1"></a></p>

<table border="1" class="grey" cellpadding="3"
width="40%" align="right" summary="">
<tr>
<td>

<center><small><b>B O X  1</b></small></center>

<p><small>Creationists commonly argue that features we
observe in the DNA of modern species--presumably including
tandemly repeated sequences--were designed specifically by
an intelligent creator; whereas scientists view tandem
repeat sequences as resulting from accidental DNA
duplications. One argument in favor of the scientific view
is that we can see examples of such genetic accidents
occurring today in human DNA (as well as DNA from
laboratory species) without apparent divine intervention.
Because of ascertainment bias--that is, we find things only
where we look for them--the best studied examples of
duplications in humans are those that cause disease. One
way DNA duplications can cause disease is if only part of a
gene is duplicated, so that the resulting protein would
have some amino acids repeated, thus altering the structure
and function of the protein (Heikkinen et al., Am J Hum
Genet 60:48, 1997; Hu and Worton Hum Mutat 1:3, 1992). When
DNA duplications occur in somatic cells (i.e. outside the
cell lineage contributing to egg and sperm) they cannot be
passed on to future generations, but they can cause
problems for the individual affected; for example, cases of
cancer have been reported containing partial gene
duplication in the cancer cells, while the duplication is
absent from the normal body tissues (Schichman et al.,
Cancer Research 54: 4277, 1994), indicating that the
duplication occurred during the life of the affected
patient. Large duplications involving entire genes can
create clinical problems if extra copies of an entire
functional gene can produce harmful effects; while this is
unusual, a well-studied example is the neurological disease
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A, in which an extra copy
of the gene known as PMP-22 appears to be the culprit.
Numerous cases of CMT1A have been reported where the
duplication is present in the affected patient but not in
either of the patient's parents, indicating that the
duplication must have occurred in the germ cells of either
parent or very early in the embryonic development of the
patient (Eur Neurol 34:135, 1994). These examples make it
clear that gene duplication is not just a hypothetical
construct--invoked to explain tandem repeats that were
created by inscrutable events in the distant past--but
rather is a natural biochemical process that can be
observed today in humans (it can also be studied in
laboratory species as diverse as bacteria and fruit flies;
Lupski et al. Am J Hum Genet 58:21, 1996). Genomes of
modern vertebrate may reflect evidence of two ancient
genome-wide duplication events that doubled the entire gene
content (Sidow Curr Opin Genet &amp; Devel 6:715,1996; Endo
et al, Gene 205:19, 1997; Pebusque et al. Mol Biol
Evol:1145, 1998); similar more recent doublings have been
deduced in certain plants, frogs and even rats (Gallardo et
al, Nature 401:6751, 1999).</small></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>


 

<p>ii. Other mutations may lead to a protein that has a
slightly different function from that of the original gene.
In fact, such differentiation of duplicated genes to
develop new functions in one copy apparently accounts for a
significant part of the expansion in complexity of the
genes of higher organisms. For example, the gene for a
primordial oxygen-carrying protein is thought to have
duplicated leading to separate genes encoding myoglobin
(the oxygen-carrying protein of muscle) and hemoglobin (the
oxygen-carrying protein of red blood cells). Then the
hemoglobin gene duplicated, and the copies differentiated
into the forms known as <img src="/pictures/alpha.gif"
alt="(alpha)" width="10" height="8" align="bottom" /> and
<img src="/pictures/beta.gif" alt="(beta)" width="8"
height="14" align="bottom" />. Later, both the <img
src="/pictures/alpha.gif" alt="(alpha)" width="10"
height="8" align="bottom" /> and <img
src="/pictures/beta.gif" alt="(beta)" width="8" height="14"
align="bottom" /> hemoglobin genes duplicated several times
producing a cluster of hemoglobin-<img
src="/pictures/alpha.gif" alt="(alpha)" width="10"
height="8" align="bottom" />-related sequences and a
cluster of hemoglobin-<img src="/pictures/beta.gif"
alt="(beta)" width="8" height="14"
align="bottom" />-related sequences. The clusters include
functional genes that are slightly different, that are
expressed at different times during the development of the
embryo to the adult, and that encode proteins specifically
adapted to those developmental periods. The divergence
between the myoglobin and <img src="/pictures/alpha.gif"
alt="(alpha)" width="10" height="8" align="bottom" /> and
<img src="/pictures/beta.gif" alt="(beta)" width="8"
height="14" align="bottom" /> genes occurred so long ago in
evolution that the shuffling of genetic information that
occasionally occurs in DNA has distributed these genes to
different chromosomes. The genes within the <img
src="/pictures/alpha.gif" alt="(alpha)" width="10"
height="8" align="bottom" /> group and the <img
src="/pictures/beta.gif" alt="(beta)" width="8" height="14"
align="bottom" /> group duplicated more recently in
evolution, and still lie in clusters.</p>

<p>iii. Finally, still other mutations that alter critical
amino acids, that affect intron splicing or that create new
stop codons, may completely destroy the function of a
duplicated gene sequence and render it a pseudogene; indeed
this is the fate of most gene duplicates (Lynch and Conery
Science 290:1151, 2000). The kinds of mutations that
destroy gene function again resemble those that have
disabled crucial non-duplicated genes, thereby causing
genetic diseases. Defective genes that are not duplicated
tend to disappear from populations over time because
individuals lacking a functional copy of the gene are less
capable of surviving to produce offspring (unless the gene
is no longer needed, as in unitary pseudogenes). However,
when a defective gene exists alongside a normal duplicate
copy, the continued function of the normal gene generally
compensates for any mutations in the defective copy; the
defective sequence is usually harmless and may be
perpetuated in the DNA as a "classical duplicated"
pseudogene. In general, each pseudogene of this type
contains sequence resembling the entire gene--including
both regulatory sequences lying outside the amino acid
coding sequences, and introns that interrupt the coding
sequences (see above). Numerous pseudogenes of this type
have been found in DNA from a variety of organisms,
including humans. For example, both the alpha and beta
clusters of hemoglobin genes in humans include duplicated
pseudogenes of this type.</p>

<p>Although most "classical" pseudogenes lie close to the
gene from which they originated via tandem duplication,
recently several laboratories have described a peculiar
variety of duplicated pseudogenes located near the
centromeres of several different chromosomes. (The
centromeres are the chromosomal segments where--just before
cell division--the two duplicated hot-dog-shaped chromosome
copies appear tied together, as diagrammed in Figure 4,
below). Apparently during primate evolution several DNA
regions have undergone a poorly understood process which
has distributed imperfect copies to the centromeric regions
of multiple chromosomes. The genes in these copies include
introns but are in many cases truncated and generally have
multiple point mutations rendering them non-functional
pseudogenes. Examples of these centromeric pseudogenes
include sequences related to the adrenoleukodystrophy gene
ALD (Eichler et al., Human Molec Genet 6:991, 1997), the
creatine transporter gene SLC6A8 (Eichler et al. Human
Molec Genet 5:899, 1996), the neurofibromatosis gene NF1
(Human Molec Genet 6:9, 1997) and a gene called FRG1 close
to the facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy locus (Grewal
et al., Gene 227:79, 1999).</p>

<h5>c. Processed pseudogenes</h5>

<p>An entirely different class of pseudogenes known as
processed pseudogenes (see Figure 3, lower right panel)
arises from naturally occurring insertions of extra gene
copies derived from RNA transcripts. Three characteristics
of these sequences suggest derivation from RNA:</p>

<p>i. Each processed pseudogene sequence resembles an RNA
transcript in that the pseudogene's similarity to its
"source gene" extends from the RNA initiation site to the
RNA termination site, but does not include sequences that
lie just outside the transcribed region, including
regulatory sequences like promoters.</p>

<p>ii. These pseudogenes lack intron sequences that are
normally transcribed into RNA but are then spliced out of
the RNA before it is used to specify the amino acid
sequence of a protein.</p>

<p>iii. They generally include the poly(A) "tail"
characteristic of RNA transcripts that encode proteins.</p>

<p>Moreover, unlike the classical duplicated pseudogenes,
which are usually found close to the functional gene from
which they derived by duplication, processed pseudogenes
are apparently inserted into DNA at random locations. This
randomness is what one would expect from an RNA molecule
that can float freely away from its source gene (from which
it was originally transcribed) before a copy is reinserted
back into the DNA. Even if it encodes a correct amino acid
sequence, a processed pseudogene is usually non-functional
because it lacks the regulatory sequences (like a
transcriptional promoter) necessary for gene expression; as
a non-functional extra copy such a sequence can accumulate
random mutations under no selective pressure, i.e., without
reducing the reproductive success of an organism that
carries such mutations.</p>

<p>Processed pseudogenes should not be confused with a
small number of retroposed gene copies that are actually
functional genes. These can arise because, rarely, a DNA
copy of a processed RNA may insert into DNA in such a way
that the inserted copy can be actively expressed. In these
cases, the DNA sequence may retain function and thus remain
under selective pressure against accumulating mutations.
Although such sequences--which can be called processed
genes or retroposed genes--represent a tiny fraction of
retroposed gene copies observed, more than a dozen have
been discovered, especially as gene copies that are
expressed specifically in the testis (Kleene et al, J Molec
Evol 47: 275, 1998). These retroposed genes are easily
distinguished from processed pseudogenes by their lack of
crippling mutations. The fact that these few retroposed DNA
copies are useful genes does not hint at any function for
the much more numerous processed pseudogenes with multiple
crippling mutations like stop codons that would preclude
their expression as functional proteins.</p>

<p>Evolutionists as early as Darwin pointed to vestigial
structures--such as the functionless eyes of blind
cave-dwelling animals or the rudimentary pelvic bones of
some snakes--as supporting the evolutionary viewpoint.
These structures serve no apparent function that could
explain their design by a creator, but they can easily be
understood in the evolutionary perspective as deriving from
structures that were functional in ancestral species.
Vestigial genetic sequences--that is, pseudogenes--provide
exquisite examples of vestigial structures, and thus
especially compelling evidence for evolution. Such
sequences can be studied in a variety of species; their
relationship to their functional counterpart is obvious and
quantitative (based on the number of sequence discrepancies
between gene and pseudogene); and the subset of processed
pseudogene can--with rare and easily recognizable
exceptions--be assumed to have been totally functionless
since the time of their origin. Finally, pseudogenes are a
rich source of data because they are abundant. The recently
completed sequence of human chromosome 22 (Dunham et al,
Nature 402:489, 1999) identified 134 pseudogenes along with
545 genes in the sequenced region, which corresponds to
about 1.1% of the human genome. If this sample is
representative, we can expect roughly 15000 pseudogenes in
the human genome.</p>

<h4>2.2.2 Retroposons</h4>

<p>How might a processed RNA sequence make its way back
into DNA? In fact, processed pseudogenes are members of a
much larger class of sequences known as retroposed
elements, which I call here "retroposons," and which all
involve RNA sequences that have been inserted into DNA. As
discussed above, in normal cellular molecular physiology,
genetic information passes from DNA to RNA to protein.
Sometimes, however, a genetic accident occurs and the RNA
gets reverse-transcribed into DNA ("retro" or backwards
from the normal direction) and the DNA gets deposited back
(or "retroposed") at some random position in the cell's
DNA. (See Figure 4.) Some readers may recognize
retroposition as the mechanism by which retroviruses like
HIV--the AIDS virus--hide in the DNA of T cells of AIDS
patients. As in the case of HIV, a critical requirement for
all retroposition is activity of an enzyme called reverse
transcriptase (RT), which generates a DNA copy of the RNA
sequence. No gene encoding this enzyme is known to be
present in the human genome other than in copies associated
with elements that undergo retroposition. The RT enzyme has
no known function for normal cellular physiology, although
it appears that a specialized variant of reverse
transcriptase is involved in maintenance of telomeres,
repetitive sequences at the tips of chromosomes. Once a DNA
copy of an RNA has been synthesized by RT, this DNA may be
inserted into breaks in DNA that occur from time to time in
the cell and that are normally sealed by a complex
machinery of DNA repair enzymes required by all cells. Such
breaks often occur at slightly different positions in the
two DNA strands, producing "staggered ends"; retroposon
sequences inserted between such ends are frequently flanked
on both sides by short identical sequences created by
repair of the two staggered ends.</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/molgen/fig3.gif" alt="[Fig3]"
width="504" height="441" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 4.</b> Retroposon formation occurs when a DNA
sequence becomes transcribed into RNA, which then is
"reverse transcribed" back into DNA. At the top left the
Figure shows a chromosome as it appears just before cell
division, looking like two hot dogs tied together at the
centromere. One gene on a given chromosome can give rise to
several pseudogenes, which generally insert randomly into
different chromosomes. A similar mechanism spreads LINEs
and SINEs, including Alu insertions.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>Of the many type of retroposons known to molecular
biologists, I will mention four major classes found in
human DNA. (For a recent review, see Prak and Kazazian,
Nature Reviews, 1:134, 2000.)</p>

<p><b>a. Processed pseudogenes.</b> In general, processed
pseudogenes (described above) have been discovered as
scientists have screened the genome (using techniques
beyond the scope of this article) for sequences similar to
known genes. Such screens turned up mutated versions with
the "processed" features described above, leading to their
identification as retroposons. Like any retroposon, this
class could have entered the germline DNA (i.e. the DNA of
sexual cells that allow propagation to future generations)
only if the germ cells contained two components: RNA
transcripts of the gene and reverse transcriptase (RT) to
copy it back into DNA. Let us consider these two components
in turn. Many of the best-known proteins are found only in
specific differentiated tissues and are not expressed
elsewhere. For example, hemoglobin is produced only in
blood cells and their precursors, and the visual pigment
proteins are produced only in the eye. The genes for such
tissue-specific proteins are almost never transcribed in
germ cells, and so they only rarely contribute to processed
pseudogenes. In contrast, all cells have certain
"housekeeping" proteins necessary for basic metabolic
functions; RNA transcripts encoding these proteins are
present in the germ cells and frequently contribute to
processed pseudogenes. The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase gene for example is a housekeeping gene
represented by about 10 processed pseudogenes in human DNA
(Ercolani et al, JBC 263:15335,1988). Because, as mentioned
above, processed pseudogene sequences do not include the
promoter sequences necessary for the initiation of RNA
transcription, once they are inserted into DNA these
pseudogenes generally are not transcribed and thus cannot
themselves represent a source gene for future retroposons.
(This limitation contrasts with features of other
retroposon classes, as we shall see below.) The other
component necessary for retroposition is reverse
transcriptase. RT is not present in most normal tissues in
measurable amounts, although it can be expressed if a cell
is infected with a retrovirus carrying the gene for this
enzyme. Germ cells, however, are one cell type in which RT
activity can be found in the absence of infectious
retroviruses. In these cells the enzyme apparently derives
from other retroposon elements--to be discussed below--that
carry functional RT genes within their sequence.</p>

<p><b>b. SINEs.</b> The best characterized class of Short
Interspersed Elements (SINEs) in primates are known as Alu
sequences. These are approximately 300 bp long and do not
encode any protein sequence. The recent DNA sequence
analysis of the human genome found about 1.1 million Alus,
comprising 10.6% of the DNA (Nature 409:860, 2001). Unlike
processed pseudogenes, which generally are not transcribed,
Alu sequences include a segment that can act as an internal
transcriptional promoter; thus each Alu insertion can
potentially be transcribed into RNA, serving as the source
for a new insertion. This property may partially explain
how these sequences have become so abundant in our genomes.
However, current evidence suggests that only a very few Alu
sequences are active sources of transcripts; perhaps
transcription from most copies is inhibited by the
chromosomal environment of the insertion (Englander and
Howard, JBC 270:10091, 1995). Even if Alu RNA transcripts
exist in some germ cells, they re-insert into the DNA only
rarely because this step requires reverse transcriptase,
which may not be present in the same cells where the Alu
RNA is being transcribed.</p>

<p><b>c. LINEs.</b> Long Interspersed Elements represent a
family of related sequences that are present in about
868,000 copies in our DNA, comprising about 20% of our
genome (Nature 409:860, 2001). They differ from the Alu
sequences in being much longer--up to about 7000
basepairs--and in containing two potential coding
sequences. One of these coding sequences bears similarity
to active RT genes. Although in most LINE copies the RT
gene contains numerous mutations that would prevent it from
encoding any functional RT enzyme, certain LINE copies do
encode active reverse transcriptase. Moreover, the
regulatory regions just outside the coding sequences of the
LINEs cause expression of the genes selectively in germline
cells. LINEs thus have several properties expected of
"selfish" DNA sequences that can spread in the host DNA
simply because they encode their own machinery for
spreading. The LINEs can be expressed in germline cells as
RNA, and the rare copies that encode functional RT can
enable the reverse transcription of the LINE RNA back into
a DNA copy which can then insert into new locations in the
DNA of the germline cell; when such a cell matures to egg
or sperm, transmission of the new LINE to future
generations can occur. Apparently the RT often falls off
the RNA before reverse transcription is complete, since
most LINE copies are truncated at their 5' ends. It is
possible that the LINE-encoded reverse transcriptase
activity can also produce the reverse-transcribed copies of
other RNAs--such as Alu transcripts and RNA transcripts of
genes--that lead to new insertions of Alu sequences and
processed pseudogenes into cellular DNA.</p>

<p><b>d. Endogenous retroviruses.</b> Infectious
retroviruses were discovered as agents of human disease and
have been intensively studied. They are the most complex of
retroposing elements and may have evolved from simpler ones
described above. All contain two identical non-coding Long
Terminal Repeats (LTRs) at their ends as well as three
genes known as gag, pol and env. These genes are encoded in
the virus not by DNA but by RNA. The pol gene encodes
reverse transcriptase, and may also encode additional
enzymatic activities. The env gene encodes proteins that
coat the outside surface (envelope) of the infectious
virus. The gag gene encodes additional proteins necessary
for processing the viral components. The structure common
to all retroviruses is thus LTR-gag-pol-env-LTR. The "left"
LTR includes regulatory sequences that can initiate RNA
transcription towards the right, into the gag-pol-env-LTR;
the "left" LTR is then recopied from the "right" LTR by a
complex mechanism. Infectious retroviruses include HTLVI,
which causes a kind of leukemia in humans, and HIV, which
causes AIDS. These viruses typically infect specific kinds
of white blood cells--lymphocytes--and insert
reverse-transcribed copies of their RNA genes into the DNA
of these cells. Soon after the discovery of infections
retroviruses, scientists noticed that similar sequences
were present in the DNA of many mammalian species,
including humans; these copies are called endogenous
retroviruses, and presumably represent the consequences of
ancient retroviral infections of germline cells. In human
DNA there are about 8 different classes of endogenous
retroviruses with members of each class varying in number
from one or two to more than 50 copies. Essentially all of
these endogenous retroviruses contain mutations that would
disrupt the function of their genes, as would be expected
if they inserted millions of years ago with no selective
pressure to maintain the function of the genes. In
addition, the duplicated LTR sequences represent potential
targets for "homologous recombination" events that delete
the DNA between the corresponding region of the LTRs,
leaving only a single composite LTR sequence; many more
copies of these isolated LTR fragments exist in the DNA
than complete retroviral copies.</p>

<h2>3. How ancient errors can persist in modern
species</h2>

<p>How could each of the several kinds of non-functional
sequences mentioned above, arising in a germline cell of a
particular individual, come to be preserved in all
individuals of a species? One possibility is that each of
these sequences happened to lie close to an advantageous
gene that became prevalent in a population by natural
selection (the pseudogene or retroposon "rode on the
coat-tails" of the nearby advantageous gene; see Nurminsky
et al, Nature 396:572,1998; Nurminsky et al. Science
291:128, 2001). Possibly such non-functional sequences
arise at a high frequency and we see only those few that
are preserved by such indirect influences or by chance
events in small populations.</p>

<p>The extra burden of carrying along even a large
pseudogene sequence--for example, 100,000 nucleotides--is
insignificant for a mammalian cell with approximately three
billion nucleotides' worth of information. In any case,
there is no known "proofreading" mechanism by which the
cell might distinguish non-functional from functional DNA
and selectively eliminate what it does not need.
Functionless DNA sequences that scientists have inserted
into the DNA of mice or other species are faithfully passed
to descendants, and naturally occurring pseudogenes and
retroposons apparently behave similarly. The accumulation
of functionless DNA is not completely unopposed; deletions
of DNA do occur, but apparently as rare accidents that do
not discriminate between functional and non-functional
sequences. Deletions that remove crucial functional genes
have been recognized as rare causes of genetic diseases;
decreased fitness of the individuals that carried them
would tend to eliminate DNA copies with such deletions.
Other deletions that by chance do not remove any functional
genes could eliminate some useless DNA including
pseudogenes and retroposons; but an individual with such a
deletion would have no particular selective advantage as a
result of the deletion, so spread of DNA copies carrying
the deletion into the population at large would be no more
likely than the spread of any other inconsequential
mutation. Thus such deletion events are clearly an
inefficient "garbage removal" mechanism; and, as an
inevitable consequence of this inefficiency, substantial
amounts of functionless "garbage" sequences have
accumulated between the functional genes of mammals. This
is a characteristic of the genetic material that was not
appreciated until recombinant DNA technology enabled
molecular biologists to look beyond amino acid sequences to
the structure of DNA itself. Although the high content of
"junk DNA" was initially surprising when it was discovered,
our current understanding of the mechanisms of genome
expansion (duplication and insertion) and the apparent lack
of significant selective pressure to minimize genome size
combine to make the accumulation of useless sequences in
our DNA seem inevitable.</p>

<h2>4. The argument from DNA to evolution: Shared
pseudogenes and retroposons</h2>

<p>The crucial observation relating the discovery of
pseudogenes and retroposons to the theory of evolution is
this: some pseudogenes and retroposons are shared between
different species, as though they were copied from a
pseudogene or retroposon in a common ancestor. Let's
examine examples from each of the classes of "errors" we
have discussed above. <a id="box2" name="box2"></a></p>


<table border="1" class="grey" cellpadding="3"
width="40%" align="right" summary="">
<tr>
<td>
<center><small><b>B O X  2</b></small></center>

<p><small>The shared galactosyltransferase pseudogenes are
fascinating for a reason that complicates their use in
arguing against creationists: evidence suggests that there
may have been a selective advantage to mutations that
inactivated this gene. The enzyme product of the gene
catalyzes the production of a particular carbohydrate
molecule that is found on cell membranes of mammals who
possess the enzyme, but also on certain infectious
bacteria. Individuals infected with such bacteria would
benefit from mounting an immune attack on this carbohydrate
molecule, but if the same carbohydrate appeared on their
own cells such an attack could damage their own tissues.
Therefore, individuals who carry mutations in the
enzyme--and thus would not make the carbohydrate on their
own cells--would be free to mount an immune attack focused
on this molecule, protecting them against many bacteria
without danger of damaging their own tissues. Therefore,
selective pressure would have led to spread of gene copies
that had undergone crippling mutations. Creationists could
reasonably argue that such mutations could have occurred
independently in different species as examples of recent
microevolution after independent creation of the species.
It is possible that different mutations did inactivate the
gene independently in several primate ancestors. However,
the human and chimpanzee galactosyltransferase pseudogenes
have identical crippling mutations; therefore, it is most
likely that the gene was inactivated in a common
human/chimp ancestor.</small></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>


<p><b>4.1. Shared unitary pseudogenes.</b> Many of the
unitary pseudogenes in humans described previously are
shared with other primates. By "shared" I mean more than
simply that the same gene is inactive in two different
species, since that situation could result if the
corresponding genes of the two species were inactivated
separately by independent mutations. Instead, in all the
examples I describe, the pseudogenes in primates carry many
of the same crippling mutations found in the corresponding
human pseudogenes. Since independent random mutations would
not be likely to be identical in two different species, the
identically mutated pseudogenes are strong evidence that
the mutations occurred in a common ancestral species.</p>

<p>For the example of the GLO unitary pseudogene of humans,
it is known that vitamin C is required in the diet of other
primates, (though not for other mammals except guinea
pigs). The theory of evolution would make the strong
prediction that primates should also be found to have GLO
pseudogenes and that these would carry similar crippling
mutations to the ones found in the human pseudogene. This
prediction was stated in earlier versions of the present
essay. A test of this prediction has recently been
reported. A small section of the GLO pseudogene sequence
was recently compared from human, chimpanzee, macaque and
orangutan; all four pseudogenes were found to share a
common crippling single nucleotide deletion that would
cause the remainder of the protein to be translated in the
wrong triplet reading frame (Ohta and Nishikimi BBA
1472:408, 1999).</p>

<p>The RT6 gene mentioned above (2.2.1.a) encodes a protein
of about 230 amino acids expressed on the surface membrane
of T lymphocytes of rodents; both the human pseudogene and
its chimpanzee homolog contain mutations producing the same
three stop codons that would prevent the synthesis of an
RT6 protein (Haag et al, M Mol Biol 243:537,1994). Several
of the human odorant receptor pseudogenes mentioned above
are found in other primates, and share the same defects as
the human pseudogenes (Rouquier S et al., Nat
Genet18:243,1998; Rouquier S, et al. Human Molec Genet
&amp;:1337,1998;Sharon et al., Genomics 61:24,1999). The
human NPY1 receptor pseudogene shares a critical frameshift
mutation with primate homologs (Matsumoto et al., J Biol
Chem 271:27217, 1996). The human urate oxidase pseudogene
shares three crippling mutations with the chimpanzee and
orangutan pseudogenes (Wu et al, J Mol Evol 34:78, 1992).
In addition, the galactosyltransferase pseudogene present
in the human genome is shared with apes and Old World
monkeys 
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/16/7401">Galili 
and Swanson, PNAS 88:7401, 1991</a>) 
although
the evolutionary interpretation of these shared
galactosyltransferase pseudogenes is complex because there
may have been selective pressure to inactivate this enzyme
(see Box 2).</p>

<p>In summary, although unitary pseudogenes are relatively
rare in humans, most of the reported examples are shared
with other non-human primates.</p>

<p>(The only other examples of human unitary pseudogenes I
know of are unique to humans, apparently having acquired
their crippling defects after the human-chimpanzee split;
they are therefore of interest as potentially contributing
to the physiologic differences between these two species.
These pseudogenes correspond to a type I hair keratin [Hum
Genet 108:37, 2001], CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase 
[<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/95/20/11751">Chou
et al., PNAS 95:11751, 1998</a>]. flavin-containing
monooxygenase-2 (FMO2) [J Biol Chem 273:30599, 1998], CMP-
N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase 
[<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/98/20/11399">Hayakawa 
et al.,PNAS 98:11399, 2001</a>] 
and the V10 variable gene of the human
T-cell receptor gamma locus [Zhang et al., Immunogenetics
43:196, 1996]. Readers are invited to let me know about
additional unitary pseudogenes.)</p>

<p><b>4.2. Classic duplicated pseudogenes.</b> There are
many examples of shared pseudogenes of this type; I will
describe only one. The steroid 21-hydroxylase gene encodes
an enzyme involved in metabolism of steroid hormones. In
human DNA, the 21-hydroxylase gene sequence, as well as an
adjacent gene encoding "complement C4," has been
duplicated; i.e., nearly identical copies of DNA segments
lie adjacent to each other, each copy containing a
complement C4 gene and a steroid 21-hydroxylase sequence.
However, only the "B" copy of the 21-hydroxylase gene is
functional; the "A" copy in all humans is a pseudogene,
i.e., it contains multiple mutations including an 8 bp
deletion that would prevent its function. The corresponding
"A" copy sequence of chimpanzee has been examined; it
contains the same crippling 8 bp deletion seen in the human
pseudogene (Kawaguchi, Am J Hum Genet 50:766-80, 1992).</p>

<p>Many of the peculiar centromeric pseudogenes described
above (in section 2.2.1.b) are also conserved in other
primates (Eichler et al., Human Molec Genet 5:899, 1996;
Regnier et al, Human Molec Genet 6:9, 1997; Grewal et al.,
Gene 227: 79, 1999).</p>

<p><b>4.3. Processed pseudogenes.</b> Because human DNA may
contain roughly four times more processed pseudogenes than
classic duplicated pseudogenes (extrapolating from data
from chromosome 22 [Dunham et al, Nature 402:489, 1999]),
there are many more examples of processed pseudogenes (than
classical pseudogenes) shared between species. I will
describe one that my colleagues and I discovered: a
pseudogene derived from the gene encoding epsilon
immunoglobulin--a kind of antibody that participates in
allergic reactions. In our studies aimed at investigating
the basis for allergy we discovered a sequence that
resembled the epsilon immunoglobulin gene except that it
had no introns, it had multiple crippling mutations, it had
on its end a sequence of almost continuous "A"s (looking
like a slightly mutated poly(A) tract), and it was located
on a different chromosome (chromosome 9) from that of the
functional gene (chromosome 14) (Max et al. Cell 29:691,
1982; 
Battey et al. PNAS 79:5956, 1982). Our evidence
suggested that this processed pseudogene also existed in
chimpanzee DNA, and subsequent detailed investigations from
other laboratories (Kawmura and Ueda, Genomics 13:194,1992)
demonstrated nearly identical pseudogenes exist in
chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan and Old World monkeys. As in
the case of all DNA insertions shared by different species
(see other examples below), the argument that these
sequences were not created independently but descended from
a common ancestral insertion is bolstered by the
demonstration that the insertions occurred in the same
position in the DNA of each species, i.e., the DNA that
surrounds the insertion is very similar between species--as
close to identical as might be expected given the
occurrence of mutations that are not selected against.</p>

<p><b>4.4. SINEs.</b> Of the roughly one million copies of
Alu sequences in the human genome, only a small fraction
have been compared between human and other primate species.
However, in several long segments of DNA where the
corresponding sequences have been obtained in human and
chimpanzee DNA, almost all of the Alu sequences are shared
between these two species. For example, in the cluster of
<img src="/pictures/alpha.gif" alt="(alpha)" width="10"
height="8" align="bottom" />-globin genes referred to
above, all seven of the Alu sequences found in human DNA
are present in chimpanzee, embedded in exactly the same
positions (Sawada et al. J Mol Evol 22:316, 1985). The same
is true of the seven Alu sequences near a pseudogene
derived from the single-copy cdc27hs gene (Gonzalez et al.,
Genomics 18:29, 1993).</p>

<p>The sequences of many Alu repeats in human DNA have been
compared, allowing classification into several families,
based on the degree of sequence similarity. Members of
certain families are found in DNA of many diverse primates,
whereas other families appear to have been dispersed more
recently as they are not shared by other species. Several
examples of insertions of the "youngest" family are known
to be polymorphic in the human population: i.e., they occur
in some individuals but not others. Indeed, the frequency
of certain Alu insertions in different human populations
has been used to deduce likely patterns of migration and
gene mixing in our human ancestors. Such observations are
consistent with the insertion of such Alu copies after the
evolution of humans. Further, the excellent health of
individuals who lack particular Alu insertions supports the
view that these insertions do not serve any important
function in human physiology.</p>

<p><b>4.5. LINEs.</b> Numerous LINE sequences have been
found at the same position in the DNA of humans and other
species, including examples in the globin locus, visual
pigment genes, and intestinal alkaline phosphatase
(reviewed by Smit et al. J Mol Biol 246:401,1995). Some of
the reported examples are shared by species as disparate as
human and cow, indicating insertions in very early
mammalian ancestors.</p>

<p><b>4.6. Endogenous retroviruses.</b> Because endogenous
retroviruses are less numerous than the other nonfunctional
DNA sequences discussed here, and because a relatively tiny
fraction of the known human DNA sequences have been
compared between species, there is a dearth of examples of
shared endogenous retroviruses. However, at least five
different examples of nearly identical retroviral sequences
embedded at the same position in human and chimpanzee DNA
have been reported (Bonner et al. PNAS 79:4709, 1982;
Dangel et al. Immunogenetics 42:41, 1995; Svensson et al
Immunogenetics 41:74,1995; Medstrand &amp; Mager J Virol
72:9782, 1998; Barbulescu et al. Curr Biol 9:861, 1999),
all apparently examples of retroviruses that were "caught"
by ancestors of ours millions of years ago. One can
anticipate that additional examples will be discovered as
more sequence data become available, especially from the Y
chromosome, which has been described as a "graveyard" for
endogenous retrovirus sequences for both human and
chimpanzee (Kjellman et al. Gene 161:163, 1995).</p>

<h3>4.7 Implications of functionless sequences shared
between species</h3>

<p>All of the examples of functionless sequences shared
between humans and chimpanzees reinforce the argument for
evolution that would be compelling even if only one example
were known. This argument can be understood by analogy with
the legal cases discussed earlier in which shared errors
were recognized as proof of copying. The appearance of the
same "error"--that is, the same useless pseudogene or Alu
sequence or endogenous retrovirus at the same position in
human and ape DNA--cannot logically be explained by
independent origins of the two sequences. The creationist
argument discussed earlier--that similarities in DNA
sequence simply reflect the creator's plans for similar
protein function in similar species--does not apply to
sequences that do not have any function for the organism
that harbors them. The possibility of identical genetic
accidents creating the same two pseudogene or Alu or
endogenous retrovirus independently in two different
species by chance is so unlikely that it can be dismissed.
As in the copyright cases discussed earlier, such shared
"errors" indicate that copying of some sort must have
occurred. Since there is no known mechanism by which
sequences from modern apes could be copied into the same
position of human DNA or vice versa, the existence of
shared pseudogenes or retroposons leads to the logical
conclusion that both the human and ape sequences were
copied from ancestral sequences that must have arisen in a
common ancestor of humans and apes.</p>

<p>This evidence for a common ancestor clinches the
argument for human/ape evolution that follows from shared
functionless sequences. Although the most numerous
documented examples of such sequences shared between
different species happen to link humans and apes (see for
example Hamdi et al, J Mol Biol 284:861, 1999), this simply
reflects the fact that the DNA of humans has been studied
more intensively than DNA from any other higher species,
while considerable homologous chimpanzee sequence is also
known. It is obvious, however, that the identical logic
could be used to link other species on different branches
of the evolutionary tree, and such examples have been
reported, e.g. SINEs clarifying relationships between
rodent species (Furano J Biol Chem. 270: 25301, 1995;
<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/95/19/11284">
Verneau et al, PNAS 95: 11284, 1998</a>) or linking horses to
rhinoceros (Gallagher et al, Mamm Genome:140, 1999) or
establishing the phylogenetic affiliations of tarsiers
(Schmitz et al., Genetics 157:777, 2001). Species as
disparate as humans and mice have been linked by examples
of the ancient SINE family known as MIRs (Mammalian-wide
Interspersed Repeats; see Smit and Riggs, Nucleic Acids
Research 23:98, 1995; Jurka et al, Nucleic Acids Research
23:170, 1995) that were found embedded at the homologous
location in the human and murine myoglobin and N-myc genes
(Donehower, Nucleic Acids Research 17:699, 1989; note that
at the time of this description the conserved sequence was
not recognized as a SINE). Additionally, ancient LINE
insertions link humans to cow, as mentioned above (similar
LINE inserts lying upstream of the intestinal alkaline
phosphatase genes in both species), as well as to rat
(similar LINE insertions in the first intron of the alpha2
subunit of the sodium-potassium ATPase genes; Smit et al, J
Mol Biol 246:401, 1995) and to mouse (e.g. LINE insertions
in the mnd2 region of chromosome 2p13 [Jang et al, Genome
Res 9:51, 1998] and near the CD4 gene at human chromosome
12p13 [Ansari-Lari et al Genome Res 8:29, 1998]). With
additional sequence comparisons of long homologous
stretches of human and mouse DNA anticipated from the Human
Genome Project and Mouse Genome Project, additional LINE
sequences shared between these species will likely be
discovered.</p>

<p>A particularly impressive example of shared retroposons
has recently been reported linking cetaceans (whales,
dolphins and porpoises) to ruminants and hippopotamuses,
and it is instructive to consider this example in some
detail. Cetaceans are sea-living animals that bear
important similarities to land-living mammals; in
particular, the females have mammary glands and nurse their
young. Scientists studying mammalian anatomy and physiology
have demonstrated greatest similarities between cetaceans
and the mammalian group known as artiodactyls (even-toed
ungulates) including cows, sheep, camels and pigs. These
observations have led to the evolutionist view that whales
evolved from a four-legged artiodactyl ancestor that lived
on land. Creationists have capitalized on the obvious
differences between the familiar artiodactyls and whales,
and have ridiculed the idea that whalescould have had
four-legged land-living ancestors. Creationists who claim
that cetaceans did not arise from four-legged land mammals
must ignore or somehow dismiss the fossil evidence of
apparent whale ancestors looking exactly like one would
predict for transitional species between land mammals and
whales--with diminutive legs and with ear structures
intermediate between those of modern artiodactyls and
cetaceans (Nature 368:844,1994; Science 263: 210, 1994). (A
discussion of fossil ancestral whale species with
references may be found at
<a href="/faqs/faq-transitional/part2b.html#ceta">
http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/faq-transitional/part2b.html#ceta</a>)
Creationists must also ignore or dismiss the evidence
showing the great similarity between cetacean and
artiodactyl gene sequences (Molecular Biology &amp;
Evolution 11:357, 1994; ibid 13: 954, 1996; Gatesy et al,
Systematic Biology 48:6, 1999).</p>

<p>Recently retroposon evidence has solidified the
evolutionary relationship between whales and artiodactyls.
Shimamura et al. (Nature 388:666, 1997; Mol Biol Evol 16:
1046, 1999; see also Lum et al., Mol Biol Evol 17:1417,
2000; Nikaido and Okada, Mamm Genome 11:1123, 2000) studied
SINE sequences that are highly reduplicated in the DNA of
all cetacean species examined. These SINES were also found
to be present in the DNA of ruminants (including cows and
sheep) but not in DNA of camels and pigs or more distantly
related mammals such as horse, elephant, cat, human or
kangaroo. These SINES apparently originated in a specific
branch of ancestral artiodactyls after this branch diverged
from camels, pigs and other mammals, but before the
divergence of the lines leading to modern cetaceans,
hippopotamus and ruminants. (See Figure 5.) In support of
this scenario, Shimamura et al. identified two specific
insertions of these SINES in whale DNA (insertions B and C
in Figure 5) and showed that in DNA of hippopotamus, cow
and sheep these same two sites contained the SINES; but in
camel and pig DNA the same sites were "empty" of
insertions. More recently, hippopotamus has been identified
as the closest living terrestrial relative of cetaceans
since hippos and whales share retroposon insertions
(illustrated by D and E in Figure 5) that are not found in
any other artiodactyls 
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/96/18/10261">Nikaido 
et al, PNAS 96:10261, 1999</a>). 
The close hippo-whale relationship is consistent
with previously reported sequence similarity comparisons
(Gatesy, Mol Biol Evol 14:537, 1997) and with recent fossil
finds (Gingerich et al., Science 293:2239, 2001; 
<a href="http://www.nature.com/cgi-taf/DynaPage.taf?file=/nature/journal/v413/n6853/full/413277a0_fs.html">Thewissen 
et al., Nature 413:277, 2001</a>) that resolve earlier
paleontological conflicts with the close whale-hippo
relationship. (Some readers have wondered: if ruminants are
more closely related to whales than to pigs and camels, why
are ruminants anatomically more similar to pigs and camels
than they are to whales? Apparently this results from the
fact that ruminants, pigs and camels changed relatively
little since their last common ancestor, while the cetacean
lineage changed dramatically in adapting to an aquatic
lifestyle, thereby obliterating many of the features --
like hooves, fur and hind legs -- that are shared between
its close ruminant relatives and the more distantly related
pigs and camels. This scenario illustrates the fact that
the rapid evolutionary development of adaptations to a new
niche can occur through key functional mutations, leaving
the bulk of the DNA relatively unchanged. The particularly
close relationship between whales and hippos is consistent
with several shared adaptations to aquatic life, including
use of underwater vocalizations for communication and the
absence of hair and sebaceous glands.) Thus, retroposon
evidence strongly supports the derivation of whales from a
common ancestor of hippopotamus and ruminants, consistent
with the evolutionary interpretation of fossils and overall
DNA sequence similarities. Indeed, the logic of the
evidence from shared SINEs is so powerful that SINEs may be
the best available characters for deducing species
relatedness (Shedlock and Okada, Bioessays 22:148, 2000),
even if they are not perfect (Myamoto, Curr. Biology
9:R816, 1999).</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/molgen/fig4.gif" alt="[Fig4]"
width="494" height="538" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 5.</b> Specific SINE insertions can act as
"tracers" that illuminate phylogenetic relationships. This
figure summarizes some of the data on SINEs found in living
artiodactyls and shows how the shared insertions can be
interpreted in relation to evolutionary branching. A
specific SINE insertion event ("A" in the Figure)
apparently occurred in a primitive common ancestor of pigs,
ruminants, hippopotamus and cetaceans, since this insertion
is present in these modern descendants of that common
ancestor; but it is absent in camels, which split off from
the other species before this SINE inserted. More recent
insertions B and C are present only in ruminants,
hippopotamus and cetaceans. Insertions D and E are shared
only by hippopotamus and cetaceans, thereby identifying
hippopotamus as the closest living relative of cetaceans
(at least among the species examined in these studies).
SINE insertions F and G occurred in the ruminant lineage
after it diverged from the other species; and insertions H
and I occurred after divergence of the cetacean
lineage.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>While some creationists accept the evidence for the
natural selection of minor variants (e.g. the divergence of
Darwin's finches on the Galapagos islands), which they call
"microevolution," most creationists deny that evolution can
explain more significant changes, which they designate
"macroevolution." However, the shared
pseudogenes/retroposons described here provide strong
evidence that humans share common ancestors with species as
disparate as monkeys, cows and mice. Thus, even though we
may lack convincing evidence that any particular fossil is
ancestral to a specific modern species, and even though we
do not have fossil evidence that clearly identifies the
last common ancestor between humans and cows or between
whales and ruminants, we can be confident from the shared
errors described here that these common ancestral species
existed. This conclusion in turn implies that significant
novel characteristics (e.g. human upright walking and brain
development, and the cetacean adaptations to aquatic life)
must have developed between the time the respective common
ancestors lived and the present day. These changes are
clearly extensive enough to be called "macroevolution," so
the "argument from shared errors" is powerful evidence for
macroevolution. This conclusion seems solid, since no
alternative explanation of these shared errors consistent
with independent origin of these animal species has been
proposed in the scientific literature.</p>

<p>Clearly the "shared errors" argument provides strong
evidence for macroevolutionary changes in the evolution of
mammals, and therefore refutes a commonly held creationist
position. But to be fair we should be clear that this
argument does not buy the whole evolutionist ballgame.
Although the evidence of shared errors implies common
descent of diverse mammalian species, it does not address
whether these species evolved from their last common
ancestors through the Darwinian mechanisms of mutation and
natural selection or through other alternative mechanisms.
Another limitation is that there are no examples of "shared
errors" that link mammals to other branches of the
genealogic tree of life on earth. For example, although
species as diverse as worms, yeast and plants have LINE
elements in their genomes, no examples of specific LINE
insertions at homologous positions between any mammal and
non-mammal have been reported to my knowledge (though I
welcome input on this point from readers). Such examples
might be expected to be hard to find, since the last common
ancestors of mammals and reptiles are thought to have lived
more than 200 million years ago, long enough that sequence
similarities that once existed in functionless DNA like
pseudogenes and retroposons may have been largely
obliterated by the accumulation of numerous mutations.
Therefore, the evolutionary relationships between distant
branches on the evolutionary genealogic tree must rest on
other evidence besides "shared errors." (Such evidence
might include other "rare genomic changes" (RGCs) besides
retroposon insertion, such as intron insertion or deletion,
chromosomal translocations and inversions revealed by
comparative cytogenetics, and variants in the genetic code,
all summarized in Rokas and Holland, Trends Ecol &amp; Evol
15:454, 2000); species relatedness can also be inferred
from traditional sequence similarity trees based
comparisons of the corresponding genes from different
species. As a final and rather obvious limitation of the
"shared errors" argument, it should be clear that this
argument does not bear on origin-of-life issues, which
creationists commonly lump with evolution.</p>

<h2>5. Creationists' responses to the argument from shared
functionless sequences</h2>

<p>Creationists tend to avoid mentioning the argument
presented in this essay since it provides persuasive
evidence for evolution, but creationist spokesman Duane
Gish has commented on the argument when he has been
confronted with it in debates; and a few other creationist
discussions of pseudogenes have appeared. Let us first
examine several of Dr. Gish's responses.</p>

<p><b>5.1</b> Some processed "pseudogenes" are functional,
so they could be examples of "similar design for similar
function."</p>

<p>As mentioned above (2.2.1.c), reverse-transcribed copies
of RNA transcripts of genes may, rarely, insert into the
DNA near an existing promoter or in some other way that
allows their transcription in a manner that is useful for
the organism. Such copies (which are really processed genes
rather than processed pseudogenes) may therefore provide
some function that provides selective pressure against
crippling mutations. Several examples of this possibility
have been reported, as mentioned above in section 2.2.1.c;
and these could be interpreted as "similar design for
similar function." But these examples share a feature that
clearly distinguishes them from the hundreds of examples of
useless processed pseudogenes reported: they lack crippling
mutations that would preclude function, and thus remain
capable of encoding a useful protein. Among bone fide
processed pseudogenes--i.e. retroposed gene copies with
multiple crippling mutations such as stop codons--no
examples with documented function have been reported.
(Readers who believe that there are examples contradicting
this statement are invited to contact me with the
literature references; I will modify this article as
necessary.) Thus Dr. Gish's argument simply reflects his
erroneous lumping together of two distinct classes of
retroposed gene copies: processed genes and processed
pseudogenes. And Dr. Gish has not yet offered any argument
that would explain--in terms of intelligently designed
function--the numerous examples of shared retroposed
sequences that, unlike pseudogenes, do not even derive from
DNA that has a functional role.</p>

<p><b>5.2</b> Some organs previously thought to be
vestigial have more recently been found to have function;
we know too little about these newly discovered DNA
features to be confident that function will not be
discovered for them in the future.</p>

<p>Imagine a defendant at a murder trial defending
himself--against overwhelming incriminating evidence--with
the parallel argument: that since some convicted criminals
have later been exonerated, he (the current defendant)
should therefore be acquitted now, because someday in the
future, evidence might be found to clear him! This defense
would be as ridiculous as Dr. Gish's argument is.
Scientists (and juries) must draw their conclusions based
on the best evidence available at the time. It is true that
later evidence may exonerate a convicted criminal or
overturn a scientific theory. This possibility should
foster humility and caution us against dogmatic conclusions
(and perhaps against the death penalty); but it should not
dissuade us from drawing the most reasonable conclusions
from the data at hand. Our present knowledge supports the
interpretation that most shared pseudogenes/retroposons are
evidence for common descent and macroevolution. If in the
future--for a particular Alu or LINE-1 or endogenous
retrovirus sequence that is shared between humans and
another species--evidence of function is discovered, then
this particular sequence could indeed be reasonably
interpreted by the creationist paradigm of "similar
sequence designed for similar function"; and so this
retroposon would have to be removed from list of shared
functionless sequences that provide evidence for evolution.
The hundreds of thousands of remaining examples on this
list would continue to offer valid support for
evolution.</p>

<p>Furthermore, while these vestigial DNA sequences were
discovered more recently than the vestigial organs known in
Darwin's time, we know enough about how they arise that we
do not need to postulate any mysterious designer or unknown
function to explain them. We know that the prerequisites
for the formation of SINEs and other retroposons--i.e., RNA
transcripts and reverse transcriptase--are present at low
levels in germline cells studied in the laboratory, where
they would be able, without any supernatural intervention,
to generate retroposons that could be transmitted to future
generations. This fact would predict that retroposon
insertions must be occurring at some frequency even today.
Indeed, specific insertions of Alu sequences into DNA of
living individuals have been documented. For example, an
Alu element was found inserted into the DNA of a patient
with neurofibromatosis I, damaging the gene associated with
this disease (Wallace et al. Nature 353:6347, 1991). The
patient's father and mother had intact gene copies with no
Alu insertion, so the insertion must have occurred in the
germ cells of either parent or very early in the embryonic
development of the patient. Similarly, a freshly inserted
LINE element was found to have damaged the gene for a blood
clotting protein, causing hemophilia in another patient
whose parents both lacked this insertion (Kazazian et al.
Nature 332:164, 1988). (Other examples of LINE or Alu
insertion causing diseases are reviewed by Kazazian [in
Curr Opin Genet &amp; Devel 8:343, 1998] by Miki [Human
Genetics 43:77, 1998] and by Deininger and Batzer [Molec
Genet &amp; Metab 6:183, 1999].) New retroposition events
are estimated to occur in from 1% to 10% of the human
population (Kazazian Nature Genet 22:130, 1999). Carlton et
al (Mamm Genome 6:90, 1995) observed de novo appearance of
a processed pseudogene when they provided a source of
reverse transcriptase by infecting cultured cells with a
retrovirus; while Esnault et al. (Nature Genet 24:363,
2000) and Wei et al. (Molec Cell Biol 21:1439, 2001)
observed processed pseudogene formation resulting from the
RT of a human LINE element. Using a sensitive assay for
detecting retroposition, Maestre et al. (EMBO J 14:6388,
1995) were able to detect retroposed copies of a marked
gene sequence being inserted into the DNA of human cells as
they were growing in the laboratory even without the
addition of exogenous reverse transcriptase. Furthermore,
Jensen and Heidmann (EMBO J 10:1927,1991) detected ongoing
retroposition of a marked LINE copy in Drosophila.</p>

<p>Recently Feng et al (Cell 87: 905, 1996) demonstrated
that the active reverse transcriptase enzyme encoded by a
freshly inserted LINE copy has an additional unexpected
activity: it is an endonuclease--that is, it is able to
cause nicks in DNA that could serve as insertion points for
new retroposition events. In fact, this endonuclease cuts
DNA with particular sequence characteristics, and the same
characteristics were observed in the insertion positions of
several randomly selected LINE copies from human DNA. (See
also Cost and Boeke, Biochemistry 37:18081, 1998). This
result suggests that LINE sequences are so well adapted for
"selfish" replication in the genome that they do not depend
on randomly generated breaks in DNA for their insertions,
but generate their own cuts. To test this idea, Moran et
al. (Cell 87:917, 1996; see also Ostertag et al, Nucl Ac
Res 28:1418, 2000) constructed a LINE sequence designed so
that if it generated any new retroposed copies in any
cells, these cells could be selected and counted. When this
sequence was put into human tissue culture cells, newly
retroposed copies were routinely produced. By testing the
effects of mutations in various segments of the LINE
sequence, it was shown that efficient retroposition
required both the reverse transcriptase activity and the
endonuclease activity present in the same protein. (This
protein is also required for efficient LINE-induced
processed pseudogene formation [Esnault et al. Nature Genet
24:363, 2000]).</p>

<p>Observations like these reinforce the notion that the
retroposon sequences we observe in our DNA and the DNA of
other mammals were not created by mysterious forces acting
only in the ancient past for inscrutable purposes, but by
simple genetic accidents that occur at low frequency as a
result of quirks of cellular biochemistry, and which serve
no purpose. The fact that a very few of these genetic
accidents may create some beneficial function 
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/93/18/9374">Britten
RJ PNAS 93:9374,1996;</a>
Britten RJ Gene 205:177,1997) does not
weaken this interpretation at all; such events are simply
examples of rare beneficial mutations whose occurrence
forms the basis for adaptive evolutionary change and whose
existence seems so difficult for the creationists to
swallow. As is the case for most mutations, the
overwhelming majority of retroposon insertions occur in the
non-functional DNA between genes, and have no effect on the
cell or organism; and it is this vast set of insertions,
shared between species, that provide the basis for the
present argument supporting evolution.</p>

<p><b>5.3</b> If all these sequences were really
nonfunctional, they would have been eliminated over
evolutionary time.</p>

<p>This argument reflects ignorance of the facts discussed
above in section 3. To repeat: no mechanism is known by
which non-functional DNA sequences might be distinguished
from functional ones and targeted for elimination by
cellular enzymes. Bacteria do appear to be under selective
pressure to eliminate nonfunctional DNA; bacterial
chromosomes have very little DNA between genes, perhaps
because competition under conditions of rapid growth may
favor chromosomes that replicate quickly--i.e. short
ones--and therefore may select for cells that have deleted
any non-functional DNA. But there is no evidence for such
selective pressure for mammalian chromosomes, in which
genes are widely separated from one another and in which
nonfunctional regions apparently constitute 90-95% of the
DNA. Indeed, one might ask: why then are our chromosomes
not stuffed with retroposon sequences at an even higher
frequency than actually observed? A reasonable answer is
that our ancestors were under selective pressure to
suppress retroposition, since high frequencies of
retroposon insertion would increase the rate of genetic
damage caused by crippling insertions into genes.
Furthermore, it is conceivable that a larger fraction of
our DNA originated through retroposition than we can now
recognize; some very ancient pseudogenes or retroposon
insertions may have undergone so many random mutations
since their insertion that their identities as pseudogenes
or retroposons have been obliterated. However, at the rate
of mutation estimated for nonselected sequences, complete
obliteration of a typical retroposon by mutations would
require over 100 million years. Hence it would not be
surprising to an evolutionist that functionless retroposon
sequences that inserted into a common ancestor of humans
and cows might still be detectable by computerized
comparisons of DNA sequences.</p>

<p><b>5.4</b> Important roles have been found for DNA
regions previously thought to be functionless</p>

<p>At a recent debate with me Dr. Gish cited a review in
Science entitled "Mining treasures from 'junk' DNA"
(263:608, 1994), seeming to imply that this review suggests
functions for pseudogenes and retroposons that would be
consistent with the creationist view that they were
designed to function similarly in similar species. In fact,
this review discusses evidence for possible functions of
centromeric and telomeric repetitive sequences,
minisatellites, introns and 3' untranslated regions. It
mentions pseudogenes and retroposons but makes no
suggestion that these particular elements have function, so
this review offers no argument against the points made in
this essay. Nevertheless, since there have been other
speculations about possible functions for DNA outside gene
coding sequences, it is worth considering why scientists
generally accept the notion that most of this DNA is
junk.</p>

<p>First, we know several mechanisms by which DNA length
can be increased through genetic accidents such as DNA
duplications and insertion of retroposons, which have been
observed in the lab or occurring in humans without apparent
effects; so it is reasonable to suppose that these
mechanisms operated in the past to increase genome size
without affecting function. There appears to be little or
no selective pressure to reduce the size of vertebrate
nuclear genomes; and there is no apparent mechanism to
selectively eliminate useless DNA. Large deletions that
eliminate functional DNA are selected against. These
observations would predict the accumulation of useless DNA
as the result of random genetic accidents, so when we see
DNA that seems non-functional, we shouldn't necessarily
assume that it has function that we don't understand.</p>

<p>Second, when DNA sequence is compared between species
like human versus mouse, sequences that are known to have
function -- coding sequences of genes in particular -- are
found to be highly similar, consistent with selective
pressure that weeds out individuals that have deleterious
mutations in these functional regions. Conversely, DNA
regions with no known function -- e.g. non-coding sequences
between genes -- generally behave as if they are under no
selective pressure, that is they apparently accumulate
mutations at a much higher rate so there is little sequence
conservation between distantly related species. As an
exception that probes the rule, comparisons of non-coding
sequence across species occasionally detect "islands" of
short conserved sequence in non-coding regions. Some of
these have turned out to correspond to regulatory regions
like promoter or enhancer elements that control when a
nearby gene is expressed. An example of such an "island"
conserved between rabbit, mouse and human was discovered in
my own lab [Emorine et al., Nature 304:447, 1983]; it
turned out to represent an important enhancer. These kinds
of regulatory regions generally take up much less DNA than
the coding sequences of the genes they regulate, so they
cannot represent a likely function for most non-coding DNA.
The good correlation between function and sequence
conservation lends support to the idea that most poorly
conserved sequences do not have function. However, it
should be noted that for most of the "islands" of conserved
sequence in DNA between genes (Shabalina et al., Trends
Genet 17:373, 2001), no function has yet been discovered.
Some may include RNA species that function without being
translated into protein.</p>

<p>A third but related argument derives from the
observation that the insertion of a retroposon into a
functional sequence is a potent way to destroy that
function. Examples of naturally occurring insertions were
discussed in section 5.2 above; and intentional retroposon
insertion is being widely used as a laboratory tool to
create panels of mouse, drosophila or yeast strains with
different gene functions destroyed. However, most examples
of retroposon insertions between genes do not have any
apparent affect on individuals harboring them; for example
the Alu sequences that are polymorphic in human DNA appear
to be harmless when present. Therefore, it is reasonable to
infer that these insertions did not interrupt any
functional sequence. (Of course it is impossible to rule
out the formal possibility that some hypothetical
functional sequences outside genes can still function
despite the presence of a retroposon insertion.)</p>

<p>Finally, several examples are known of pairs of species
that have similar apparent complexity but widely different
genome size (C-value paradox). The pufferfish Fugu has
about one fourth the genome size of other fish species but
about the same number of genes. The main difference is a
smaller amount of DNA between genes in Fugu DNA (e.g. see
Elgar et al. Genome Res 9:960, 1999). Although questions
remain about the interpretation of this difference, it
would seem that much of the DNA between genes in most fish
genomes (and probably in ours also) is dispensable.
(Conversely, the small regions of non-coding sequence that
are conserved between Fugu and Homo frequently correspond
to functional regulatory sequences.)</p>

<p>It is impossible to prove absence of function for any
region of DNA. Moreover, it is likely that some function
may be found for a few additional short regions of
non-coding DNA that are not currently recognized to have
function. Nevertheless, as indicated above, scientists draw
tentative conclusions based on data currently at hand
rather than on hypothetical possibilities of future data;
and the arguments I just presented based on presently
available evidence suggest that most DNA sequences that
appear to be functionless are just that.</p>

<p><b>5.5</b> Pseudogenes serve a function: they provide a
"backup" copy that can be corrected to encode a useful
protein if the functional gene gets critically mutated.</p>

<p>Dr. Gish provided no specifics for this claim, but
perhaps he was referring to a recent suggestion that a
bovine seminal ribonuclease pseudogene was recently
"corrected" to become functional by a process known as
"gene conversion" (Trabesinger-Ruef et al. FEBS Lett
382:319, 1996). Although this may occasionally happen, far
more instances have been described in the literature in
which defects in a pseudogene induce damaging mutations in
a nearby functional gene by gene conversion, inactivating
the functional gene. As an example of this kind of event,
in almost all patients suffering from deficiency in steroid
21-hydroxylase because their (normally) functional
21-hydroxylase "B" gene copy has been inactivated by point
mutations, these mutations apparently resulted from gene
conversion by the "A" pseudogene copy (Collier et al, Nat
Genet 3:260, 1993; Carrera et al. Hum Hered 43:190, 1996).
Similar gene conversions by a pseudogene are thought to
have inactivated the glucocerebrosidase gene in Gaucher
disease patients (Eyal et al. Gene 96:277, 1990), the gene
14.1 encoding an immunoglobulin "surrogate light chain" in
a patient with immunodeficiency (Minegishi et al., J Exp
Med 187:77, 1998) and the von Willebrand factor gene in
patients with von Willebrand disease 
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/91/6/2221">Eikenboom 
et al., PNAS 91:2221, 1994</a>). 
In other cases gene conversion events
have apparently transferred genetic information between two
pseudogenes (Shapiro and Moshirfar, J Mol Biol 209:181,
1989) or between two functional genes (Ollo and Rougeon,
Cell 32:515, 1983). Because gene conversion involving
pseudogenes has been reported to occur with harmful or
neutral effects more than it has with beneficial effects,
the hypothesis that pseudogenes were "designed" with the
potential for gene conversion as their purpose seems
unconvincing. (The one example where pseudogene copies
clearly do fulfill an important function in transferring
their sequence to another gene copy by gene conversion
occurs in the somatic diversification of immunoglobulin
variable region genes of chickens and rabbits; of the many
mutations that are generated by this mechanism, those few
that provide a "better fit" between the immunoglobulin and
its target antigen are selected for expression. This
selection for improved function among genes that have
undergone quasi-random sequence changes is an attractive
biological model for the evolutionary improvements in
protein function. Ironically, in several debates with me
Dr. Gish denied that such somatic diversification occurs,
although he was obviously totally ignorant about the
scientific literature concerning antibody genes.) In
addition to being unconvincing for the reason described
above, Dr. Gish's idea that pseudogenes were created to
provide a "backup" gene copy offers no creationist
explanation for the more numerous shared retroposons that
are not pseudogenes.</p>

<p><b>5.6</b> All this retroposon stuff is really too hard
to understand.</p>

<p>Dr. Gish used this appeal to the audience at a recent
debate with me. He seemed to be coaxing the audience to
ignore the implications of the argument from shared
pseudogenes and to disregard the fact that he (Dr. Gish)
could not find valid counter-arguments to oppose it. This
is a typical debate maneuver for creationists: using humor
or invocation of faith or some other irrelevant appeal to
distract a lay audience from realizing that a creationist
position has been effectively refuted.</p>

<p>(This essay was sent to Dr. Gish to solicit any further
arguments against the points made here. No reply was
received.)</p>

<p><b>5.7</b> In addition to Dr. Gish, creationist John
Woodmorappe has commented on pseudogenes (Noah's Ark, a
Feasibility Study, 1996, published by ICR, p. 202;
Bible-Science News 33:7,1995). He makes several of the same
arguments as Dr. Gish (see 5.2 and 5.4 above) but adds a
few of his own. A creationist interpretation of pseudogenes
offered by Woodmorappe is that some pseudogenes may be "the
result of degenerative changes in living organisms since
the Fall." This interpretation seems plausible, and--if we
ignore the "Fall" part--not very different from the
evolutionary idea that pseudogenes arise by random genetic
accidents. However, this interpretation completely ignores
the fact that many pseudogenes are shared between apes and
humans, located in the same positions and sharing the same
genetic defects, apparently the result of the same genetic
accident or "degenerative change" in a common ancestor. (If
these shared pseudogenes arose after the "Fall" as
suggested by Woodmorappe, did the "Fall" perhaps occur
before man diverged from the apes?)</p>

<p><b>5.8</b> In addressing shared pseudogenes, Woodmorappe
tries to cloud their strong support for evolution by
claiming that for particular pseudogenes the degree of
"relatedness" inferred from the presence or absence of the
pseudogene in different species contradicts the species
"relatedness" inferred by evolutionists from other
characteristics. In this argument, Woodmorappe falls in
line with other Creationist arguments that invite us to
discard evolution because of specific cases that violate a
simplistic interpretation of evolution, and to ignore the
vastly greater number of examples that support evolution.
In the long and complex history of life on earth, many
exceptions to simplistic notions have been generated--e.g.
cases where older fossils lie above younger ones (because
of folding of geologic strata or thrust faults) or examples
where sequence similarities of small stretches of DNA
compared between species seem to violate accepted
relationships (because of statistically expected errors due
to small samples). Similarly, we can expect cases in which
a pseudogene or retroposon that arose in the ancestor of
three modern species (A, B and C) may get deleted in one
(say C), suggesting a closer relationship between A and B
than is warranted on other grounds. An example like this
should not cause us to discard what we learn from the
majority of shared pseudogenes and retroposons; rather, we
should use caution in drawing generalizations from
exceptional cases. <a id="box3" name="box3"></a></p>


<table border="1" class="grey" cellpadding="3"
width="40%" align="right" summary="">
<tr>
<td>
<center><small><b>B O X  3</b></small></center>

<p><small>Woodmorappe describes an example of an epsilon
immunoglobulin pseudogene that was reported 
(Ueda et al, PNAS 82: 3712 1985) 
to be shared by gorilla and man but not
by chimpanzee, seeming to contradict the conventional
evolutionary view that human ancestors diverged from the
gorilla lineage before they diverged from the chimpanzee
lineage. Unfortunately, Woodmorappe failed to consider
later data from Ueda's laboratory (Kawamura and Ueda,
Genomics 13:194, 1992) that were available when Woodmorappe
wrote in 1994 (Bible Science News 32:4 p. 12). These more
recent data show that DNA deletions destroying duplicated
copies of the epsilon immunoglobulin genes (1) occurred
independently in human and gorilla lineages (independence
was deduced from the fact that the "right" and "left"
boundaries of the deleted DNA were completely different in
the two species), and (2) also occurred (again
independently) in chimpanzee. Thus Woodmorappe's example of
a shared pseudogene linking humans to gorilla but not to
chimp (in apparent violation of the more recent divergence
of human ancestors from chimpanzee accepted by most
evolutionists) is incorrect: these are not "shared"
pseudogenes but independently arising pseudogenes, and
chimpanzee has a similar, though larger, deletion. (I
should mention that I cited this same incorrect example in
my original version of this essay. However, at the time I
wrote--1986--the example was supported by the evidence then
available; and I printed a correction in Creation/Evolution
after the new data were published. I should also stress
that the example of the processed epsilon pseudogene
mentioned in section 4.3 above represents a completely
different sequence, which no one disputes is shared by
humans, chimps and gorillas.)</small></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>


<p>However, the example of shared pseudogenes that
Woodmorappe offers to challenge the evolutionary model has
more mundane explanation: it is simply based on outdated
incorrect information (see <a href="#box3">box 3</a>).</p>

<p><b>5.9</b> A final hypothesis offered by Mr. Woodmorappe
(in personal correspondence) is that similar genomes (like
those of human and chimp) might tend to acquire the same
pseudogenes independently, while less similar genomes may
be less able to acquire the same pseudogenes. This
obviously ad hoc hypothesis would theoretically explain
why--even if humans and chimps were independently
created--they might share more pseudogenes than less
similar, independently related species pairs such as human
and gibbon. The problem with this hypothesis is that
independent occurrence--i.e. in two different
individuals--of the same retroposon inserting at the same
position has almost never been reported, even in
individuals of the same species. I have been able to find
only four publications describing examples of identical
independent insertions. One involves a modified Rous
sarcoma virus engineered with a specific selectable marker
and infecting turkey fibroblasts grown in tissue culture
(Shih et al, Cell 53:531, 1988); and even in this unusual
paper with a specially engineered virus the frequency of
such insertions was estimated at only 1 in 4000 insertion
events. The second example is a very recent and
controversial publication (Slattery et al., Mol Biol Evol
17:825, 2000) which interprets two identical insertions of
a SINE at the same location (an intron of the gene Smcy) in
a domestic cat and a bobcat as representing independent
insertions rather than reflecting a single insertion in a
common ancestral feline. Two additional publications (Kass
et al, J Mol Evol 51:256 2000; Cantrell et al., Genetics
158:769, 2001) describe apparent identical but independent
insertions of SINEs in mouse species. (John Woodmorappe
declined to cite any data at all when challenged to provide
examples of independent insertions. However, if readers of
this essay are aware of other evidence for independent
insertions of the identical element at the identical
position in any laboratory models, I would appreciate
appropriate citations and will update this essay to reflect
them.) Very many naturally occurring insertions have been
documented in yeast TY elements, drosophila gypsy and P
elements, murine retroviruses and transgenes, and human HIV
insertions--all without identical independent insertions
having been reported. If independent organisms of the same
species (i.e. with genomes more nearly identical than human
versus chimp) almost never acquire the same pseudogene or
retroposon insertion at the same position, it is hard to
take seriously the hypothesis that, for example, the same
seven Alu inserts in same positions of the human and
chimpanzee <img src="/pictures/alpha.gif" alt="(alpha)"
width="10" height="8" align="bottom" /> globin locus (see
section 4.4 above) could have occurred as 14 independent
insertion events.</p>

<p><b>5.10</b> Couldn't a pseudogene have been transmitted
by a virus from one species to another, leading to shared
pseudogenes? A proposal along these lines has been
suggested by anti-evolutionist Pat Kohli and seems
superficially plausible. Several viruses, including
retroviruses, are known to occasionally pick up nucleotide
sequences from a "donor" cell which can then, after
reinfection of a new cell, be inserted into the DNA of the
new "recipient" cell. Indeed this mechanism is known to
have significant consequences: if the transmitted DNA
includes a mutated version of certain key genes regulating
cell division, such a DNA sequence can act as an oncogene
and cause malignancy in the recipient cell (Bishop, Cell
42:23, 1985). Theoretically, a pseudogene or retroposon
sequence might captured by a virus and then be transmitted
across species by this mechanism, leading to the existence
of identical useless sequences shared between two species.
Indeed, rare instances of apparent cross-species transfer
of retroposons have been reported (e.g. between two fruit
fly species 
[<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/96/22/12621">Jordan 
et al, PNAS 96: 12621, 1999</a>] 
or from
venomous snake to ruminants 
[<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/95/18/10704">Kordis 
and Gubensek, PNAS 95:10704, 1998</a>; 
Kordis, Genetica 107:121, 1999]). However,
this is not likely to be the explanation for most shared
pseudogenes/retroposons for at least three reasons.</p>

<p>First, shared pseudogenes/retroposons are generally
found at the exactly homologous position in the DNA from
each species. This is almost always true in the case of
classical pseudogenes, which lie in close proximity to the
functional gene, and it is also true for Alu sequences like
those mentioned in the globin gene cluster, and for
processed pseudogenes whose location has been determined
(e.g., the human immunoglobulin epsilon processed
pseudogene mentioned above [Ueda, et al, EMBO J 1:1539,
1982; Tanabe et al. Cytogenet Cell Genet 73:92, 1996]).
Target sites for viral insertion may share certain local
sequence features (Craigie in Trends in Genetics 8:187,
1992; Knoblauch et al., J Virol 70:3788, 1996; 
<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/91/12/5557">Stevens 
and Griffith, PNAS 91:5557, 1994</a>), 
but these features occur
quite frequently and are generally scattered throughout the
recipient cell DNA. Other than the papers mentioned in
section 5.9, there is no precedent or known mechanism for a
virally transmitted DNA segment to target a specific
location in recipient cell DNA, as would be necessary for a
pseudogene representing a hypothetical viral insertion to
occur at the same location as the hypothetical donor
sequence. Therefore, the shared locations of
pseudogenes/retroposons with respect to surrounding DNA
argue strongly against such a model of cross-species
transmission.</p>

<p>Secondly, if most shared pseudogenes/retroposons
represented virally-mediated transfer from one species into
another, one would expect to find viral sequences near
pseudogenes in "recipient" species. Such viral sequences
are regularly present in known examples of viral
transmission of DNA from one cell to another, including
insertions of engineered retroviral constructs; but viral
sequences are not found associated with most
pseudogenes/retroposons other than endogenous
retroviruses.</p>

<p>Finally, several genealogic trees have been generated by
comparing across species for the presence or absence of
LINE or Alu insertions at specific locations in the genome,
an exercise similar to that shown in Figure 5 above (Malik
et al, Mol Biol Evol 16: 793, 1999; Hamdi et al J Mol Biol
284:861, 1999); the retroposon-derived genealogic trees
were precisely congruent to trees previously established
based on sequence similarities and anatomic features. If
cross-species tranfer explained most shared retroposons, no
such congruence would be expected.</p>

<p>In a computer-assisted search of the scientific
literature, I could find only two examples of pseudogenes
for which viral transmission was even tentatively
considered as a mechanism of origin, in both cases with
rather weak evidence 
(Gruskin et al., PNAS 84:1605, 1987
and Robins et al., J Biol Chem 261:18, 1986). Readers who
are aware of other examples are invited to Email them to me
for inclusion in future updates of this article. For the
present, the evidence argues against virally-mediated
cross-species transfer as a general mechanism to explain
shared pseudogenes/retroposons.</p>

<p><b>5.11</b> Creationist L. J. Gibson has also addressed
pseudogenes in <a
href="http://www.grisda.org/origins/21091u.htm">a published
article</a> (Origins 21:91, 1994). Gibson's article boils
down to two points, one similar to that discussed in
section 5.2 above, plus an additional more philosophical
point. He notes that the argument from shared pseudogenes
rests on the assumption "that God would not create similar
non-functioning sequences in separate species," which he
calls "a theological argument [which] can hardly be
addressed by science" and which would require Scriptural
support to be believed. Since the Bible does not
address--and therefore leaves open--the possibility that
God might create non-functional sequences in DNA, Gibson
feels that one cannot dismiss the notion that God did in
fact create such sequences individually as he created each
species, including those non-functional sequences that we
now find shared between different species.</p>

<p>It should be mentioned parenthetically that Gibson's
argument undercuts the creationists' own interpretation of
species similarity mentioned at the beginning of this essay
(section 1.2). As we discussed, creationists have claimed
that the similarity trees based on sequence information
need not be accepted as evidence for evolutionary
relationships, because species independently created by an
intelligent designer might be expected to show identical
patterns of apparent relatedness. Gibson's criticism
applies equally well against this creationist argument, as
the Bible does not mention God's plans for sequence
similarity.</p>

<p>However, as we discussed earlier, this creationist
notion of similar sequences designed for similar functions
at least makes some intuitive sense. In contrast, Gibson
proposes a clearly unacceptable ad hoc hypothesis when he
suggests that a designer might have placed non-functional
retroposon insertions--mimicking all the features of those
currently retroposing randomly in the laboratory--into the
same positions of independently created species' DNA; this
idea merits as much credence as the claim that shared false
entries in a directory are due to independent mistakes
rather than plagiarism. Gibson's hypothesis does not argue
for a creator making understandable design decisions, but a
creator so unpredictable that he could be the author of any
scientific findings traditionally interpreted as
undesigned--unless the Bible specifically states otherwise.
Thus Gibson's logic would support the following statements,
because they are not specifically contradicted by the
Bible: (1) God created fossils looking like the remains of
animals who never lived, and embedded them in rocks. (2)
God created radioactive elements in rocks that would
falsely suggest ages older than their actual ages. (3) God
created the universe 6000 years ago with starlight on its
way to our eyes but with the properties expected of light
that left stars billions of years ago. In other words,
Gibson's logic invites us to reject any scientific argument
for evolution if that argument is not specifically verified
in the Bible. Gibson's view may be internally consistent,
but it clearly requires that the truth of the Bible be
accepted on faith as a basis for judging the merits of
scientific conclusions, and thus it departs from true
science based on hypothesis testing, inductive logic, and
conclusions based on observed data. If a scientist sees a
retroposon inserting in the laboratory as a result of
several known biochemical parameters, Occam's razor
discourages him from postulating an intelligent hand
guiding its creation. If we find other insertions in our
DNA with identical features to those arising under
observation, we assume that the ones in our DNA arose by a
similar mechanism. We know that such insertions arising
under laboratory observation can be used to trace the
lineage of laboratory animals, and that other natural
insertions can be used to trace populations in the wild; we
have no reason to dissuade us from using similar insertions
to trace the lineages of different species. This inductive
reasoning is fundamental to paleontology, radioactive
dating, astronomy, physics, medicine and every other field
of science. If Gibson feels that the merits of a scientific
argument depend on how well it is supported by the Bible,
he can simply dismiss evolution outright because it
conflicts with Genesis, and avoid the bother of dealing
with all the details of the individual scientific
observations and deductions on which evolution is based.
This "Bible first" approach may be appropriate for
religion, but it is unacceptable as science.</p>

<h2>6. Testing the model</h2>

<p>One feature of science that distinguishes it from
revealed religious belief (and evolutionists from
creationists) is the scientific conviction that new
knowledge about the past can be obtained from thoughtfully
designed analysis of the modern world. Creationists often
claim that, since the origin of species occurred in the
distant past, there is no scientifically valid way to study
the process today and so evolution is not real science
testable by experiment. However, even without actual
experiments, a scientific hypothesis can be tested if it
suggests a non-trivial prediction that can be verified, or
falsified, by the collection of more data.</p>

<p>Indeed the interpretation of shared processed
pseudogenes outlined here represents a hypothesis that can
be tested because it presents a rather startling
implication: from a comparison between two nucleotide
sequences from a single species--that is, the sequences of
a processed pseudogene and the functional gene from which
it derived--it should be possible to predict which other
species will share the same pseudogene and which will not.
To understand the logic of such a prediction, consider the
fact that if a processed pseudogene arose in an ancient
species, copies of that pseudogene should be found in the
modern descendants of that species. Thus, according to the
evolutionary model, if we knew when a human processed
pseudogene arose, and could thus fix its origin to a
particular position on the accepted evolutionary "tree," we
would predict that the same processed pseudogene should be
found in modern species that derive from that point on the
tree and not in any other branches.</p>

<p>In fact, there is a way to estimate when a given
processed pseudogene was formed. It turns out that "silent"
mutations--that is, mutations that have no effect on the
survival of the organism (like all mutations in useless
pseudogenes)--accumulate at a fairly uniform rate. This
rate has been estimated by examining the number of "silent"
sequence differences between corresponding functionless
sequences in two species and comparing this number with the
approximate date of divergence of the same two species as
indicated by the fossil record. Given this mutation rate
and the number of sequence differences between a particular
processed pseudogene and its functional source gene (from
the same species), one can estimate the date of origin of
the pseudogene; then, based on this date, one can derive
predictions about which other modern species should carry
the same pseudogene. These predictions can be tested by
searching for the pseudogene in a variety of species.</p>

<p>Consider, for example, the processed human epsilon
pseudogene discussed earlier (section 4.3). The number of
nucleotide differences between this pseudogene and the
functional gene suggests that this pseudogene arose about
40 million years ago. Therefore, the evolutionary
interpretation of processed pseudogenes presented in this
essay would predict that mice and rabbits (which are
thought to have diverged from the human lineage 70 to 80
million years ago, before the apparent origin of the
pseudogene) should not carry this pseudogene. In contrast,
apes and Old World monkeys--whose estimated dates of
divergence from the human lineage (5-10 and 30 million
years ago, respectively) are both after the apparent
pseudogene origin--would be expected to carry the
pseudogene. Available evidence confirms all of these
predictions and is also consistent with similar predictions
about the species distribution of other processed
pseudogenes (see for example Anagnou et al. PNAS 81:5170,
1984 with respect to dihydrofolate reductase, Craig et al.
Gene 99:217,1991 with respect to triosephosphate isomerase,
and Friedberg and Rhoads Molec. Phylogenet &amp; Evolution
16:127, 2000 with respect to enolase, calmodulin and
argininosuccinate synthetase).</p>

<p>By a similar logic, it is possible to estimate the age
of insertion of an endogenous retrovirus by comparing the
sequences of the "left" and "right" LTR (see section
2.2.2.d above). Since the "left" LTR is copied from the
"right" LTR sequence at the time of insertion, the two LTRs
share identical sequence at the time the retrovirus copy
originates. After insertion, the two LTRs accumulate
mutations independently, and so the number of sequence
differences between the two LTRs can be used to estimate
the age of a particular retroviral insertion; this age can
be used to predict the species distribution of shared
copies of the particular retrovirus insertion. When the
ages of several human endogenous retroviruses were
estimated recently using this approach, the predicted
species distribution of shared copies was confirmed
(<a href="http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/96/18/10254">Johnson 
&amp; Coffin, PNAS 96:10254, 1999</a>).</p>

<p>While individual human SINE and LINE insertions cannot
easily be dated by sequence analysis alone, it may be
possible to estimate a rough time period when certain
subclasses inserted. This is possible because specific
classes of similar retroposons are thought to have
populated the mammalian genome in waves, with certain
families (and subfamilies, in the case of Alu and LINE
sequences) being copied from a small number of source
retroposons active at any particular period in our
evolutionary history. This model has been deduced from the
fact that for some families of human retroposons (e.g.
LINE2), comparisons between specific members of the family
reveal relatively divergent sequences, as though individual
copies have accumulated many different mutations over a
long time since inserting into our DNA (Nature 409:860,
2001, see p 881), while others, such as the Alu sequences
(particularly the Ya5 and Ya8 subfamilies) and the Ta
family of LINE1 sequences, show fewer deviations from a
consensus sequence and are therefore thought to have
inserted more recently. These evolution-based
interpretations of human retroposon sequences predict wide
species sharing of putatively older retroposons but more
restricted sharing of putatively younger ones, and these
predictions are confirmed by independent species
distribution data for these retroposons (Gonzalez et al,
Genomics 18:29, 1993; Shaikh and Deininger, J Mol Evol
42:15, 1996; Carroll et al, J Mol Bio 311:17, 2001; Sheen
et. al. Genome Res 10:1496, 2000; Boissinot et al., Mol
Biol Evol 17:915, 2000).</p>

<p>More shared retroposons will certainly be discovered,
and only time will tell how consistently evolutionary
predictions like these are confirmed. But at present,
almost all available data are consistent with evolutionary
models of common descent, and no alternative creationist
rationale for explaining this consistency has been
proposed. Repeated instances of this kind of prediction and
confirmation can supply convincing evidence for evolution
even if some kinds of direct experiments, like studies on
living dinosaurs, are impossible. (If readers are aware of
other examples of processed pseudogenes or other
retroposons whose distribution in different species either
supports or contradicts the accepted "genealogic tree" I
would appreciate hearing about these cases by Email, and
would revise this posting as appropriate.)</p>

<h2>7. Conclusion</h2>

<p>Do the shared functionless sequences described here
prove that humans and apes had a common ancestor? Actually,
no scientific knowledge is based on unassailable proof of
the sort that supports mathematical theorems, so the
creationist complaint that evolution has "never been
proven" simply reveals a gross misunderstanding of the
nature of science. Rather, science advances by the
accumulation of clues sought by persistent detectives
(scientists) who try to derive logical and unbiased
deductions from these clues. Like a jury presented with
these clues, we can try to arrive at the most likely
verdict even though we recognize that our facts are
incomplete; there are no living "witnesses" to the eons of
evolution, so we must make the best deductions we can from
the clues at hand. In "the case of the shared functionless
sequences," an unbiased jury would surely conclude that
copying from a shared ancestor was the most likely
explanation, consistent with the evolutionary
interpretation. This conclusion would follow the logic of
actual copyright law in which shared errors are accepted as
evidence of copying. The strong acceptance of this
conclusion among scientists is indicated by the fact that
no alternative explanation has been proposed in the
scientific literature to explain the widespread sharing of
so many functionless sequences between species. Thus, if we
are to accept the evidence of science, it would appear that
common descent of disparate species from a shared ancestor
("macroevolution" in the creationist terminology) has
actually occurred.</p>

<p>As new examples of shared pseudogenes and retroposons
are discovered by molecular geneticists, this information
will join the immense body of clues from other disciplines
which, collectively, already provide overwhelming evidence
for evolution. Despite this impressive evidence, no
scientist believes that all the answers are in on evolution
or that our current understanding of pseudogenes and
retroposons is immune from revision in light of future
knowledge. Indeed, scientists in laboratories throughout
the world are continuing to probe the genes of various
species, comparing the molecular genetics data with the
fossil record and refining our knowledge of the history of
our species.</p>

<p>At the present stage of this never-ending research, the
evidence suggests what to me is an awesome notion: like a
biological Rosetta Stone or Dead Sea Scroll, our own
DNA--an Encyclopedia Brittanica's worth of information in
every cell of our body--contains a record of the past which
we are just now learning to read. This record, reflecting
millions of years of genetic history, includes the relics
of ancient genetic accidents that occurred before our
ape-like ancestors roamed the plains of Africa, relics that
we now share with other descendants of those same
ancestors: modern gorillas and chimpanzees. 
<!-- begin trailer -->
<br clear="all" />
</p>

<div><map name="ltrailermap" id="ltrailermap">
<area shape="rect" coords="0,0,96,27" href="/" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="97,0,191,27"
href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="192,0,287,27"
href="/origins/search.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="288,0,383,27"
href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="384,0,481,27"
href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,29,160,55"
href="/origins/faqs-qa.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,29,319,55"
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,29,480,55"
href="/origins/faqs-index.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,56,160,82"
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,56,319,82"
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,56,480,82"
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,83,160,109"
href="/origins/faqs-flood.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,83,319,109"
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,83,480,109"
href="/origins/faqs-debates.html" alt="" />
</map></div>

<center>
<p><a href="/scripts/imagemap/ltrailer.map"><img
src="/pictures/ltrailer.gif" usemap="#ltrailermap"
width="481" height="110" alt="" ismap="ismap"
border="0" /></a></p>

<p class="minus1"><a href="/">Home Page</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs.html">Browse</a> | <a
href="/origins/search.html">Search</a> | <a
href="/origins/feedback.asp">Feedback</a> | <a
href="/origins/other-links.html">Links</a><br />
 <a href="/origins/faqs-qa.html">The FAQ</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html">Must-Read Files</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-index.html">Index</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html">Creationism</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html">Evolution</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html">Age of the Earth</a> |
<a href="/origins/faqs-flood.html">Flood Geology</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html">Catastrophism</a> |
<a href="/origins/faqs-debates.html">Debates</a></p>
</center>

<!-- end trailer -->
</body>
</html>


