ID=H0685
URL=http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/
SIZE=9142
DATE=11/07/2002
TIME=17:07:11
DATASET=Biology
HTML=<!DOCTYPE HTML SYSTEM "html.dtd">
<HEAD><TITLE>Christof Koch's Home Page</TITLE></HEAD>
<BODY> <H1><CENTER>Christof Koch's Home Page</CENTER></H1>
<FONT SIZE=4>

<CENTER>                            <P>                           <IMG
SRC="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/christof-climbing-SEP-01.jpg">
</CENTER> 


<P>I was  born  on November   13, 1956 in   Kansas  City, Missouri.  I
subsequently    grew    up     in   Amsterdam/Holland,   Bonn/Germany,
Ottawa/Canada,    and Rabat/Marocco where   I   graduated from the  <A
HREF="http://users.mtds.net.ma/~madani">Lyc&egrave;e     Descartes</A>
with a French Baccalaur&egrave;at (Section C) in 1974.

<P>I studied Physics and Philosophy in T&uuml;bingen, Germany, and was
awarded my  Master of  Physics   in 1980  and my   PhD  (<em>Nonlinear
information processing in dendritic  trees of arbitrary geometry</em>)
from    the   Max-Planck-Institut    for  Biological  Cybernetics   in
T&uuml;bingen   in     1982.   My  &quot;Doctor-Father&quot;    was <A
HREF="http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/cbcl/web-pis/poggio/homepage.html">
Prof. Tomaso Poggio</A>, now at MIT.

<P>After   4  years as    a post-doctoral  fellow  at  the  Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory and at the  Department of Psychology at MIT, I
joined <A HREF="http://www.caltech.edu/caltechhome.html">Caltech</A>'s
newly                        started                                <A
HREF="http://www.cns.caltech.edu/cnshome.html">Computation and  Neural
Systems</A> option,  where I have been  ever since (now as a Professor
of     Computation    and   Neural      Systems),   running   the   <A
HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/"> K-Lab</A> as  well as  being  the
Executive                     Officer            of                 <A
HREF="http://www.cns.caltech.edu/cnshome.html">CNS</A>.

<P>For a  detailed <I>Curriculum Vitae</I>  (in .pdf format)  click <A
HREF="cv-ego.pdf">here</a>.</p>  

<p>Our search  for the neuronal origins  of consciousness, facilitated
by Apple Computers, is high-lit in a
<A HREF="http://www.apple.com/scitech/sciencemasters/koch/">
photo-essay</a>.</p>

<CENTER> <P> <IMG SRC="images/mri-images.gif"> </CENTER>

<P> These are images of my brain. Cool, eh! To find out more or to
look at most of my brain, hit 
<A HREF="/~koch/brain-browser.html">this button </A>.

<P>  To   see  a  photograph  of   me  sitting  in  a   tree,  hit  <A
HREF="images/christof-beanie.gif"> here </A>.

<P> In  the  summer  of  2000,  my son  Alexander  and  I  joined  an
archeological expedition  to dig up part  of the Temple  built by King
Herod        in        20         BC        in        <A        HREF="
http://www.israel-mfa.gov.il/mfa/go.asp?MFAH00wk0">       Caesarea</a>,
along the Israeli coast. While there, I got a Apple 
<A HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/mac-tattoo-2-small.jpg">
tattoo</a>.  Together with  the Boeing B-747 Jumbo Jet  and the Golden
Gate  Bridge  in  San  Francisco,  the Apple  Macintosh  is  the  most
beautiful  and  elegant  artifact  of  the 20-th  century.  A  perfect
marriage of form  with function.  And to answer  the obvious question,
yes,                              this                              <A
HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/mac-tattoo-1.jpg">
tattoo</a> will remain this crisp and cool until the day I die.

<P>My major intellectual  interests are:<UL>

<LI><P>Trying to  find out where I came  from, where I will  go to and
what I am doing here. This  amounts to reading a lot of philosophy and
going nowhere fast. </LI> </P>

<LI><P>Trying  to understand  how individual  nerve cells  can process
information, that  is what  are the biophysical  mechanisms underlying
computation at the level of synapses, channels and membranes.  I wrote
a    textbook     on    this    topic,    entitled     <A    HREF    =
"http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/biophysics-book">
<strong>Biophysics  of Computation:  Information Processing  in Single
Neurons</strong></A>.  Being  a single  authored book that  passed the
500  pages mark  made  this  my own  little  "Cauchemard de  l'enfer".
</LI></P>

<LI><P>Finding out what makes us conscious.  I continue to collaborate
with <A HREF  = "crick-koch.gif"> Dr.  Francis Crick  </A> at the Salk
Institute, exploring  the neuronal  basis of visual  consciousness and
awareness.      For    our    current     ideas,    see     <A    HREF
="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/unconscious-homunculus.html">The
Unconscious  Homunculus</A>.    An  expanded  presentation   of  this,
followed by  criticisms of eight scientists and  philosophers of these
ideas,     has     appeared     in     the     second     issue     of
<i>Neuro-Psychoanalysis</i>.  For  a relatively recent  summary of our
ideas,  see  <A   HREF  =  "crick-koch-cc-97.html">"Consciousness  and
Neuroscience"</A> that apppeared in the journal <I>Cerebral Cortex</I>
in  1998.   We have  also  written a  brief,  introductory  <a href  =
"Elsevier-NCC.html">  essay </a>  for an  encyclopedia on  our general
approach to  consciousness.  For  our latest thinking,  see <a  href =
"koch-crick-nature-01.pdf">this</a>    single    page    article    in
<I>Nature.</I>                          A                          <A
HREF="http://www.apple.com/scitech/sciencemasters/koch/">
photo-essay</a> outlines  some of this  research.  </LI> </P>

<LI><P>I    am   closely    associated    with   the    <A   HREF    =
"http://assc.caltech.edu">  Association for  the  Scientific Study  of
Consciousness</A>  (ASSC),  that  promotes research  within  cognitive
science, neuroscience,  philosophy, and other  relevant disciplines in
the sciences and humanities, directed toward understanding the nature,
function,  and underlying  mechanisms of  consciousness.   We organize
conferences,  edit a  journal and  so on  (see its  web-site  for more
information).The  2000 <A HREF  = "http://www.ulb.ac.be/event/ASSC4/">
conference</A> was in June of  2000 in Brussels.  I'm also involved in
a   much  broader,   unorthodox   but  fun   conference   <A  HREF   =
"http://www.consciousness.arizona.edu/tucson2000/"> "Towards a Science
of  Consciousness"</A> that will  be held  again in  April of  2002 in
Tuscon. </li></p>

<LI><P>Together  with <a  href="http://optics.caltech.edu/">Prof.  Demetri
Psaltis</a>,     and     a      graduate     student,     <a     href=
"http://optics.caltech.edu/billgr/billgr.html#welcome">Greg     Billock
</a>, we  are considering various technical scenarios  (e.g.  <a href=
"http://optics.caltech.edu/billgr/camelapplet/CamelApplet.html">Desert
Survival  video  game</a>)  in  which  it  can  be  shown  under  what
conditions attention  and awareness  can lead to  superior performance
compared to more conventional solutions.  </P></LI>

<LI><P>In         collaboration          with         <a         href=
"http://www.digitalstudio.com/web/fr/uk.htm"> Digital Studio, S.A.</a>
in  Paris, France,  I'm working  on a  15 minute  long  animated movie
travelling through  the visual  system, from the  retina to  deep into
cortex                                                              (<a
href="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/DigitalStudio.Brain.pdf">   see
one frame</a> from the V1 portion of a pilot).  </p></li>

<LI><P> I love  to climb mountains, towers and big  walls.  You ask me
why? Jon  Krakauer says  it quite well  <I>"By and by,  your attention
becomes  so  intensely focused  that  you  no  longer notice  the  raw
knuckles,  the  cramping thighs,  the  strain  of maintaining  nonstop
concentration.   A trance-like  state settles  over your  efforts, the
climb becomes  a clear-eyed  dream. The accrued  guilt and  clutter of
day-to-day existence, all of it is temporarily forgotten, crowded from
your  thoughts by  an  overpowering  clarity of  purpose,  and by  the
seriousness of the task at hand."</i> </p></li>

<LI><P>Check         here         for         my         recent         <A
HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/klab-cgi/paper.pl">publications</A>.</P>

<LI><P> During the  winter term, I will be  teaching, in collaboration
with   Profs.    Pietro   Perona    and   Shin   Shimojo,    <a   href
="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/cns186">CNS/Bi/EE   186   Vision:   From
Computational Theory to Neuronal  Mechanisms</a>. In spring, I will be
teaching  <a  HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/cns120/"> CNS/Bi  120:
The Neuronal Basis of Consciousness"</a>.

<P> To return to these sites, click

<A HREF="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/"><IMG 
SRC="http://www.klab.caltech.edu:/~giacomo/icons/klab.gif"></A>

<A HREF="http://www.caltech.edu/caltechhome.html">
<IMG SRC="http://www.klab.caltech.edu:/~giacomo/icons/caltech.gif"></A>


<HR>
</FONT>
<ADDRESS>Christof Koch / koch@klab.caltech.edu / Last updated on 9/17/01.
</ADDRESS></BODY>


<CENTER>                            <P>                           <IMG
SRC="http://www.klab.caltech.edu/~koch/mac-tattoo-2-very-small.jpg">
</CENTER> 
