ID=H0724
URL=http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/fitness/
SIZE=69433
DATE=11/07/2002
TIME=17:07:27
DATASET=Biology
HTML=<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
<meta name="description"
content="New evidence from molecular geneticists joins with the immense body of clues from other disciplines which collectively provide overwhelming evidence for evolution." />
<title>The Evolution of Improved Fitness</title>
<meta name="keywords"
content="evolution, fitness, mutation, natural selection, molecular genetics, weasel, Blind Watchmaker, antibodies, creationism, Duane Gish" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/styles/main.css"
type="text/css" />
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/pictures/to.ico" />
<meta name="classification" content="Science Education" />
<meta name="robots" content="index, follow" />
<meta name="rating" content="Safe for Kids" />
<meta name="copyright"
content="Article &copy; 1999-2001 by Edward E. Max, site and HTML coding &copy; 1998-2002 by The Talk.Origins Archive" />
</head>
<body>
<!-- begin header -->
<div><map name="headermap" id="headermap">
<area shape="rect" coords="159,63,254,99"
href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="Browse" />
<area shape="rect" coords="255,63,353,99"
href="/origins/search.html" alt="Search" />
<area shape="rect" coords="354,63,451,99"
href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="Feedback" />
<area shape="rect" coords="452,63,548,99"
href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="Other Links" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,0,158,99" href="/"
alt="Home" />
<area shape="rect" coords="159,0,559,62" href="/"
alt="Home" />
</map></div>

<center>
<div><a href="/scripts/imagemap/header.map"><img
src="/pictures/header.gif" usemap="#headermap" width="560"
height="100" border="0" alt="The Talk.Origins Archive"
ismap="ismap" /></a><br />
 <br />
 

<h1 class="plus2">The Evolution of Improved Fitness</h1>

<h2 class="plus1">By Random Mutation Plus Selection</h2>

<address class="plus0">by <a
href="mailto:max@cber.fda.gov">Edward E. Max, M.D.,
Ph.D.</a></address>

<div class="minus1">Copyright &copy; 1999-2001</div>

<div class="minus1">[Last Update: September 1,
2001]</div>

<p><img src="/pictures/thicksep.gif" alt="" width="560"
height="10" /></p>
</div>
</center>

<br />
<br />
<table border="0" class="grey" cellpadding="10" width="40%" summary=""
align="right">
<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Correspondence with Critics</b></p>

<p><small>In June of 2000, a reader of this Talk.Origins
essay suggested that I solicit a response from Dr. Lee M.
Spetner. Spetner's book "Not by Chance" attacks the theory
of evolution using arguments from information theory, in an
effort to support a poorly articulated "creation"
alternative. I Emailed Spetner, and an extensive (and
interesting, in my view) correspondence ensued, which we
agreed to link to the present article. The unedited
correspondence is difficult to follow. There were no length
limitations placed on either of us, and many points made by
each of us were addressed by the other in comments spread
over several successive Emails. To make the correspondence
readable I have assembled together the various arguments
relevant to a particular issue in the debate. My edited
version is <a href="/faqs/fitness/spetner.html"><b>linked
here</b></a>. This version contains most of the arguments
central to the correspondence, but due to time constraints,
some have been omitted. This edited version has not been
approved by Spetner, and he will likely have further
rebuttals. The correspondence will be updated periodically
as time permits.</small></p>

<p><small>Dr. Ross Olson, a creationist pediatrician,
attended my debate with Dr. Duane Gish on February 22,
2001, and initiated an Email correspondence with me. After
reading my essay at the Talk.Origins page you are now
looking at, Olson posted a <a
href="http://tccsa.freeservers.com/articles/olson_to_max_1_cl.html">
<b>critique</b></a> at a creationist Website he maintains.
Olson's critique argues against points I made in the essay,
in the debate and in our correspondence. His site now links
to a rebuttal from me, a second critique by him and second
rebuttal by me. My rebuttals will be also available <a
href="/faqs/fitness/olson.html"><b>
here</b></a> on the Talk.Origins server.</small></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

<br />
<br />
 

<h2>1. Introduction</h2>

<p><img src="/pictures/letters/T.gif" alt="T" align="left"
width="41" height="45" />he theory of evolution includes a
number of ideas that some people find difficult to accept
intuitively. One of the most difficult seems to be the
notion that the intricate and interdependent structures we
observe in modern plants and animals arose through random
genetic mutations selected over time. For some people it is
much easier to believe that the beautiful and functional
features of the human eye, for example, were designed by an
intelligent creator than to imagine how they could have
been generated through random events. Creationists
capitalize on this conceptual difficulty, presenting
several arguments that appear to demonstrate that random
mechanisms could never lead to even a single functioning
protein, let alone an eye. These arguments can be refuted
by theoretical counter-arguments; yet many people have
difficulty accepting these counter-arguments at an
intuitive level. What might be persuasive would be a clear
example in living organisms that shows how random mutation
plus selection can lead to improved "fitness." Some time
ago I realized that just such an example was provided by
experiments related to my own laboratory research, which
concerns the genes encoding the immune system proteins
known as antibodies. Because antibody genes are not well
known to the general public, I decided to write this
article in the hope that it might be useful for readers
perplexed by the creationist arguments.</p>

<h3>1.1 The creationist view of random mutation and
selection</h3>

<p>Before discussing antibody genes, it is worthwhile to
consider what the creationists say about randomness versus
design. Let's focus on three favorite arguments of the
creationists which seem persuasive because they contain
some true elements and some valid logic.</p>

<h3>1.1.1 Mutations as harmful</h3>

<p>First, creationists proclaim that mutations are harmful.
According to the creationists, if you take a well-running
complex biological machine and subject it to random
alterations, you could scarcely expect to have made any
improvements and almost certainly will have harmed the
organism. Creationists point out that all the classic
mutations seen in humans are detrimental, causing such
genetic diseases as sickle cell anemia, muscular dystrophy,
cystic fibrosis, and cancer syndromes. Not a single clear
example of a beneficial human mutation has been described.
To explain adaptive changes in populations -- such as the
famous darkening of the peppered moth population (which
occurred when the soot-darkened trees resulting from heavy
industry made light-colored moths easier targets for hungry
birds) -- the creationists argue that the variant genes for
dark and light color were present in the original
population, designed by a creator to allow moths to live in
varying environments; in this view the shift towards darker
coloration in the moth population resulted from shifts in
the frequencies of existing designed genes without
requiring new random mutations. According to creationists,
the essential relationship between natural selection and
mutations is that selection acts conservatively to weed out
individuals with mutations and to prevent the spread of
mutations into a population.</p>

<h3>1.1.2 Information theory</h3>

<p>Several formal arguments have been put forward to the
effect that random mutations cannot increase the
information content of a system. Since the information
content of the human genome is vastly larger than that of
bacteria, if mutation cannot play a role in this increase
then the foundation of evolution by mutation and natural
selection would seem to be in question.</p>

<h3>1.1.3 Statistical argument</h3>

<p>A final argument put forward by creationists against the
role of random mutation in biological origins is a
statistical calculation supposedly proving the
impossibility of an evolutionary origin of proteins. A
protein is large biological molecule constructed of smaller
subunits, known as amino acids, which become linked
together in a linear chain and then folded into a precise
three-dimensional structure. There are twenty different
kinds of amino acids in proteins, and the specific sequence
of these amino acids determines the final shape and
properties of a given protein. A typical protein is
composed of a hundred or more amino acids in a strictly
defined order. The creationists ask: what is the
probability that the correct sequence of amino acids of a
specific protein -- for example, the 141 amino acids of the
human oxygen-carrying protein called globin -- could have
been selected by chance? The total number of possible
141-long amino acid sequences is 20<sup>141</sup>, a number
so incomprehensibly huge that the statistical probability
of the actual globin sequence ever appearing from a random
assortment of amino acids is negligibly small. In a
picturesque simile, the creationists are fond of comparing
the probability of correctly assembling a protein sequence
by this random selection model to the likelihood that a
tornado blowing through a junkyard could assemble a 747
airliner.</p>

<h3>1.2 Refutation of the creationists' arguments</h3>

<h3>1.2.1 Are all mutations harmful?</h3>

<p>While it is true that most mutations are either harmful,
as suggested by the creationists, or neutral, the
creationists gloss over a crucial fact: beneficial
mutations do occur, though they are very rare. Can a
beneficial mutation that occurs once in million individuals
ever really contribute to evolution? Yes it can, since a
rare beneficial mutation can confer a survival or
reproductive advantage to the individuals that carry it,
thereby leading -- over several generations -- to the
spread of this mutation throughout a population. Beneficial
mutations occurring in several different individuals in
several different genes can simultaneously spread through a
population, and can be followed by successive rounds of
additional mutation and selection.</p>

<p>Does the fact that we know many human detrimental
mutations but essentially no clear beneficial ones mean
that there are have been no beneficial mutations in human
history? Not at all, since there is a clear bias in what
medical scientists have studied. The human mutations we
know most about are detrimental because medical scientists
preferentially study illnesses that cause significant
morbidity and mortality. Consider the theoretical
possibility that a beneficial mutation has occurred in a
particular human gene; even if this mutation were
identified by a comparison of the mutated gene in a child
versus the unmutated version of the same gene in both
parents, there is no way that this mutation could ever be
recognized as beneficial. If the mutation increased
intelligence, strength, longevity or specific disease
resistance, this would never be apparent without long-term
breeding experiments that could obviously never be done on
humans. Therefore, since such beneficial mutations in
humans could never be recognized in humans, our ignorance
of examples cannot be taken as evidence that they don't
exist. However, the experiments necessary to demonstrate a
beneficial mutation can be done with laboratory organisms
that multiply rapidly, and indeed such experiments have
shown that rare beneficial mutations can occur. For
instance, from a single bacterium one can grow a population
in the presence of an antibiotic, and demonstrate that
organisms surviving this culture have mutations in genes
that confer antibiotic resistance. In this case (in
contrast to the situation with the peppered moth
populations described above) origin of the population from
a single bacterium allows comparisons of the mutated genes
with the corresponding genes from the original bacterium,
verifying that the variant sequences were not present
before the culture with antibiotics and therefore arose as
de novo beneficial mutations.</p>

<h3>1.2.2 Information theory arguments</h3>

<p>While a detailed mathematical consideration of
information theory is beyond the scope of this article,
none of the creationist arguments based on information
theory that I am aware of adequately address the obvious
increase in information that can occur when a gene
duplicates and the two copies undergo independent mutations
leading to two genes with somewhat different functions.
Gene duplication, mutation and selection are all known to
occur due to natural biochemical processes in a variety of
organisms studied in the laboratory. Many gene families are
known with members that encode proteins having related
structure and related but distinct function. Each family
can be explained by multiple gene duplications followed by
random mutation and differentiation of the functions of the
individual gene copies. Clearly the expansion from a single
primordial gene to a large family of genes with distinct
functions represents an increase in genetic
information.</p>

<p>An example that I have already mentioned in another
posting on Talk.Origins is the hemoglobin/myoglobin family.
The gene for a primordial oxygen-carrying protein is
thought to have duplicated leading to separate genes
encoding myoglobin (the oxygen-carrying protein of muscle)
and hemoglobin (the oxygen-carrying protein of red blood
cells). Then the hemoglobin gene duplicated, and the copies
differentiated into the forms known as alpha and beta.
Later, both the alpha and beta hemoglobin genes duplicated
several times producing a cluster of
hemoglobin-alpha-related sequences and a cluster of
hemoglobin-beta-related sequences. The clusters include
functional genes that are slightly different, that are
expressed at different times during the development of the
embryo to the adult, and that encode proteins specifically
adapted to those developmental periods. Other examples of
gene families that appear to have developed by such
duplication and differentiation include the immunoglobulin
superfamily (comprising a large variety of cell surface
proteins), the family of seven-membrane-spanning domain
proteins (including receptors for light, odors, chemokines
and neurotransmitters), the G-protein family (some members
of which transduce the signals of the
seven-membrane-spanning domain family proteins), the serine
protease family (digestive and blood coagulation proteins)
and the homeobox family (proteins critical in development).
A large part of the increase in information in our genomes
compared with those of "lower" organisms apparently results
from such gene duplication followed by independent
evolution and differentiation of duplicated copies into
multiple genes with distinct function. If an information
theory analysis claims that random mutation cannot lead to
an increase in information but the analysis ignores gene
duplication and differentiation through independent
mutations, such an analysis is irrelevant as a model for
gene evolution, regardless of its mathematical
sophistication.</p>

<p><a id="box" name="box"></a></p>

<table border="1" class="grey" cellpadding="3"
width="40%" align="right" summary="">
<tr>
<td><br />
<br />
<center><small><b>B O X</b></small></center>

<p><small>While my purpose in this posting is not to defend
Dawkins but to describe a different, biological model of
mutation and selection, so many readers have written to
offer the same three additional concerns about Dawkins's
simulation that I feel obliged to discuss them.</small></p>

<p><small> </small></p>

<p><small>1. The target sequence was specified by an
intelligent designer.</small></p>

<p><small>The fact that the target sequence in the "weasel"
model was chosen in advance is an unavoidable consequence
of Dawkins's goal of contrasting the single-step selection
model with the model of multiple sequential rounds of
mutation and selection. The creationist single-step model
also starts with a specific protein sequence and then tries
to calculate the odds of ever achieving this target
sequence by a single selection step from random sequences;
thus, a target sequence is specified in advance for either
model. (Incidentally, whether this target sequence
originally derived from an intelligent design or an
evolutionary process is irrelevant to the question of
whether it can be created anew by a procedure involving
randomness and selection. In particular, Dawkins's choice
of a 28-letter line from Shakespeare rather than a
28-residue amino acid sequence from a known protein is
irrelevant in judging the relative efficacies of the two
procedures in reproducing the target sequence.) The result
of Dawkins's exercise is to show that the single-step
procedure is essentially incapable of arriving at the
target sequence within a reasonable timeframe, while the
sequential-step procedure can readily achieve the same
pre-specified target sequence. This difference is all that
Dawkins was trying to show. Thus the complaint that
"specification of the target sequence in advance weakens
Dawkins's result" is not valid, in that this same feature
(specifying a target sequence in advance) is applied
equally to both models, as it must be to compare their
efficacy.</small></p>

<p><small> </small></p>

<p><small>2. The model differs from evolution</small></p>

<p><small>How well does Dawkins's model simulate evolution?
In thinking about this question, one needs to specify
whether the simulation is modeling abiogenesis (the origin
of life from non-life) or evolution from pre-existing life
forms.</small></p>

<p><small>Almost nothing is known about abiogenesis, and
the mechanisms involved are highly speculative; in
contrast, a large body of evidence supports evolution by
common descent, with natural selection playing a
significant role. Dawkins's model doesn't seem to
correspond exactly to either abiogenesis or evolution. The
model supposes that a mechanism exists for replicating
existing copies of the sequence to produce a "progeny"
generation. This suggests that the simulation is a model
for a process in evolution occurring at a time after life
-- including reproduction -- has already arisen. But once
life has arisen, evolution of a protein from random amino
acid sequences is not thought to be the usual mechanism by
which new proteins arise in evolution; instead, new
proteins are believed to arise by modification of
pre-existing protein sequences, usually after gene
duplication.</small></p>

<p><small>However, some proteins with essentially random
amino acid sequences are generated by frame-shift mutations
(causing a coding sequence to be read in the wrong triplet
reading frame) or by splicing mutations (that convert
non-coding intron sequence into coding sequence). These
processes might have occurred more frequently an early
stage of "proto-life," at a time when a replication
mechanism had arisen, but was less accurate than
replication is today. A critical component of Dawkins's
model is that one of these random protein sequences could
have some tiny activity that was useful in some way,
probably by interacting with other materials in its
environment, allowing the protein to provide a selective
advantage that would tend to increase its frequency in
later generations by natural selection. Then each
successive mutation could have provided a slight increase
in efficiency of that function that would allow the mutated
protein to replace earlier versions of the protein through
further selection. In this model, each step must provide an
increase in efficiency, in contrast to the creationist idea
that there can be no selectable function until the final
sequence is reached.</small></p>

<p><small> </small></p>

<p><small>3. No random sequence can have any
function</small></p>

<p><small>Several readers have complained that Dawkins's
model is unrealistic because - they assume - no random
sequence could have any function that might allow even
minimal selection for improvement. Is this assumption
correct? To rephrase this question in words more relevant
to evolution: how many different random amino acid
sequences would have to be tested before one could be found
that would have a desired property even to a minimal
degree? Some creationists suggest that this number is
larger than the number of atoms in the universe. The
antibody model described in this essay suggests that the
number is much smaller. Your immune system can make
antibody proteins that will bind specifically to almost any
foreign protein administered - even to proteins that were
designed by biotech companies and never before encountered
by any immune system, so your antibodies could not have
been "designed" to bind to them. Apparently, even before
administration of the foreign antigen, the finite "library"
of antibodies in your body - generated by the random mix
and match strategy described in this essay - is large
enough that some antibodies will bind to just about any
particular target. Any of these antibodies that have the
desired binding property can then be improved upon by
successive rounds of mutation and selection. If
quasi-random antibody sequences can be found that will bind
to almost any antigenic challenge, this suggests that a
specific desired function can be found in a relatively
small number of random sequences amino acid sequences,
making Dawkins's model not so unrealistic as creationists
claim. I plan to elaborate on the functional potential of
random protein sequences in a future essay.</small></p>

<p><small> </small></p>

<p><small>Thus, although Dawkins's simulation does not
match closely to the usual model of evolution of a protein
from a pre-existing sequence, it does correspond to one
possible scenario in the context of evolutionary theory. In
contrast, the single-step selection model does not
correspond to anything in evolutionary theory. The
singe-step model is exploited by creationists because they
can claim to naive audiences that it is implied by the
evolutionist terms "random" and "selection," after which
they can demolish this straw-man by demonstrating the
impossibility of its achieving a target protein sequence.
They avoid mentioning that an alternative model involving
"random" and "selection" -- the sequential multi-step
model, which more accurately reflects evolutionary theory
-- can easily achieve a target sequence</small></p>

<p><small>.</small></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

<br />
<br />
 

<h3>1.2.3 Statistical impossibility of proteins?</h3>

<p>What about the argument concerning the statistical
improbability of obtaining a specific 141 amino acid
sequence by looking for the correct sequence among randomly
generated sequences? Certainly this mechanism could not
explain the origin of protein sequences, but the
creationist suggestion that this mechanism is part of
evolutionary theory is false; it is a "straw-man" -- a
false creationist caricature of evolution -- used
repeatedly by creationists to mislead naive audiences into
thinking that evolution is illogical. It is false because
it demands a specific sequence in a SINGLE selection step
from a pool of random sequences, whereas the real
evolutionary model for the origin of protein sequences
involves MULTIPLE ROUNDS OF RANDOM MUTATION followed by
MULTIPLE selection steps as outlined above.</p>

<p>In a beautiful discussion of the distinction between
these two models, British biologist Richard Dawkins (The
Blind Watchmaker New York, 1986) simulated the
creationists' straw-man caricature on a computer. He
programmed the computer to generate random sequences to see
if it would ever generate a line from Hamlet: "Methinks it
is a weasel." This line has 28 characters (including
spaces), so the computer was programmed to make 28
selections from the 27 possible characters (26 letters plus
space). A typical output was</p>

<blockquote>MWR SWTNUXMLCDLEUBXTQHNZVJQF</blockquote>

<p>Since there are 27<sup>28</sup> different possible ways
of choosing from 27 alternatives 28 times, one can
calculate the probability of picking the correct sequence
and, based on the speed of the computer, estimate how long
on average one would have to wait for the correct sequence
to be printed. Dawkins figured a million million million
million million years. If this were the best way protein
evolution could be conceptualized -- by selection in a
SINGLE step from random sequences -- one might conclude,
along with the creationists, that a protein sequence could
not have evolved. But the creationists' single step
selection model is clearly a "straw-man" designed to
ridicule the concept of randomness as a component of
evolution. The real evolutionist model is that modern amino
acid sequences evolved by successive steps in which random
mutations of pre-existing sequences were subjected to
selection; any rare mutant that provided more efficient
function was propagated to future generations, in which the
process of mutation and selection was repeated over and
over. When Dawkins terminated his computer program
simulating the straw-man "creationist version" of evolution
and rewrote a program that more closely approximates the
"evolutionist version" of evolution, the results of the
simulation were quite different. Dawkins programmed the
computer to generate an initial sequence randomly, as in
the first model, and the computer produced:</p>

<blockquote>WSLMNLT DTJBKWIRZRESLMQCO P</blockquote>

<p>Then, following Dawkins's revised program, the computer
made multiple copies (progeny) of this sequence, while
introducing random "errors" (mutations) into the copies.
The computer examined all the mutated progeny and selected
the one that had most similarity (however slight) to the
line from Hamlet. This selected sequence was used as the
basis for another generation of progeny with further
mutations, from which the best copy was again selected --
and so on. By ten generations, the sequence had "evolved"
to</p>

<blockquote>MDLDMNLS ITJISWHRQREZ MECS P</blockquote>

<p>By thirty generations, it was:</p>

<blockquote>METHINGS IT ISWLIKE B WECSEL</blockquote>

<p>Instead of taking millions of years, the computer
generated METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL in about half an
hour, at the forty-third generation. Thus a cumulative
multi-step model is not at all implausible as a model for
evolution, given both a mechanism for replicating imperfect
copies and a strong selective pressure. (The replication
mechanism is, of course, a big "given"; how such a
mechanism might have developed is a separate question
concerning the origin of life rather than its evolution,
and is not the subject of this article.) The importance of
Dawkins's simulation is that it highlights the error of all
the creationist arguments against the statistical
improbability of evolution, by showing that the
creationists' choice of a single-step versus cumulative
multi-step model creates a falsely low estimate of the
potential for deriving a particular sequence via random
mutation and selection. Although both the single-step model
and the cumulative multi-step model involve random
sequences and selection, the predicted consequences of the
two models are very different. The creationists ignore this
difference and intentionally discuss only the model that
gives the result they like, even though this model
corresponds least well to the theory of evolution.</p>

<p>Creationist Duane Gish has ridiculed Dawkins's computer
model with the criticism that the final line from Hamlet
was achieved only through an intelligently designed program
running on an intelligently designed complex computer; the
need for intelligent design to achieve a complex sequence
is, says Gish, exactly what the creationists have been
claiming from the beginning. (See also <a
href="http://www.answersingenesis.org/WebMan/Article.asp?ID=3746">
this web page</a>.) At creation-vs-evolution debates, this
argument is an effective creationist ploy since audiences
generally can't see the fallacy quickly enough before the
debate moves on to other topics. On reflection, however, it
is clear that Gish's argument is false because it conflates
the need for intelligent design in performing the
simulation (a need that no one denies) with the need for
design in what is being simulated; and it is the latter
that is the issue at question. To make this distinction
clear, consider the following example. Suppose a computer
model of weather conditions is able to predict a rainstorm;
no one will reasonably deny that the computer and the
weather simulation software were intelligently designed,
but this does not imply that the storm itself was created
by a designer. The designed computer program is only an
analytical tool for studying the natural process, and the
necessity of intelligence for the analysis says nothing
about the necessity of intelligence in the natural process.
Similarly, the intelligent design that went into Dawkins's
computer and simulation program do not at all imply that
the processes being simulated -- random mutation and
selection -- require intelligent design. (For a discussion
of other criticisms of the Dawkins simulation, see the <a
href="#box">box</a> above.)</p>

<h2>2. Antibody Genes</h2>

<p>Despite the logical fallacy in the creationists'
dismissal of Dawkins's simulation, the seductive appeal of
this argument led me to think that it could be most clearly
countered if one could cite a biological example in which
-- without the intervention of any intelligent designer --
successive rounds of mutation and selection could be
unambiguously shown to lead to increased fitness within
living organisms. As it happens, my own laboratory research
in the area of antibody genes made me familiar with
experiments showing just such a biological example. This
example -- somatic mutation and selection of antibody genes
-- should make it very difficult for the creationists to
continue to insist that random mutations are always harmful
and cannot lead to improved function in a real biological
system. To appreciate the beauty of the mutational
evolution of antibody genes, it is necessary to understand
as background the deep mystery that this system posed
before recombinant DNA technology made it possible to probe
antibody genes directly, beginning in the late 1970s. (The
discussion that follows may contain more information than
you ever wanted to know about antibody genes, but this
material is necessary to really understand the biology of
the evolutionary model I will describe. For those readers
who wish to skip over this background, the heart of the
argument is in sections 4 and 5.)</p>

<p>It is common knowledge that a child who gets measles and
then recovers is immune to further attacks by this virus.
In fact, immunity to this or other illnesses can be
generated in the absence of disease if various weakened
forms of viruses, bacteria, and bacterial toxins are
administered as vaccines. The protection that results from
such vaccines is not due to a general strengthening of the
body's defenses, but rather is highly specific; inoculation
with a vaccine based on a particular strain of bacterium or
virus protects against that agent, but often does not
protect against infection by even closely related strains.
Furthermore, experiments of the last century demonstrated
that in many cases the immunity depends upon specific
proteins that are present in blood after vaccination. These
proteins, called antibodies (or immunoglobulins) can bind
specifically to molecules from the foreign material (or
antigen) in the vaccine. The binding of antibody to antigen
can kill invading bacteria, neutralize invading viruses or
toxins, and target all of these foreign materials for
destruction by "garbage-eating" white blood cells.
Antibodies are secreted into the bloodstream by a another
kind of white blood cell called the B lymphocyte.</p>

<p>If one takes blood samples from an animal at different
times before and after immunization by injecting an
antigen, one generally finds that before immunization the
blood does not contain significant amounts of antibody
specific for the antigen. Beginning several days after
immunization, antibody against the injected antigen begins
to increase in the blood, often peaking at one to two weeks
after immunization. A subsequent injection of the same
antigen (a "booster") producers a much faster response,
with higher amounts of antibody.</p>

<p>An important feature of the interaction between a
particular antibody and its antigen is the tightness of the
binding between these two molecules; this tightness, which
can be measured by experiments, depends on how good the fit
is between the antibodies and antigen, analogous to the fit
of hand in glove or key in lock. In general, during the
course of an immune response, the antibodies increase not
only in numbers but also in the tightness with which they
bind antigen -- their "affinity." The affinity often rises
still further on subsequent booster shots of antigen. By
binding more tightly to antigen, high affinity antibodies
are much more efficient in carrying out their protective
tasks.</p>

<p>Antibodies were found early on to be proteins -- that is
they are made of amino acids whose sequence determines
their properties, including their antigen-binding
specificity. The information governing exactly which amino
acids are used for each position in any protein sequence is
stored in the gene for that protein. For each gene, the
sequence information is encoded chemically in the sequence
of subunits (known as nucleotides) in the long linear
molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). (A more detailed
discussion of DNA structure and function may be found in
section 2.1 of my <a
href="/faqs/molgen/">Plagiarized
Errors and Molecular Genetics</a> article.)</p>

<h2>3. Three mysteries</h2>

<p>The recognition that our immune systems are capable of
producing -- precisely when needed -- highly specific
antibodies against an immense number of bacterial and viral
antigens led to three profound mysteries: (1) How does the
body realize exactly which antibody genes need to be
activated to fight a specific infection so that it can
produce just the right antibodies? (2) How does our DNA
store the immense amount of information necessary to encode
specific antibodies against all the foreign invaders that
we may encounter? This mystery is compounded by seemingly
conflicting estimates that a mouse has no more than 100,000
genes but can make more than a million different
antibodies, each of which would seem to require its own
gene. (3) How can the progressive increase in antibody
affinity during an immune response be explained?</p>

<h3>3.1 Answer #1: Clonal Selection</h3>

<p>An answer to the first question was suggested by
MacFarlane Burnet in a hypothesis known as the "clonal
selection theory." (See Figure 1.) According to this model,
each of the millions of B lymphocytes circulating in a
resting state in the blood of an animal has the potential
to become an active antibody-secreting cell; but each B
lymphocyte can make only one species of antibody, with a
particular amino acid sequence and thus a particular
antigen specificity. Before immunization, each resting B
lymphocyte displays on its surface a membrane-bound form of
the antibody that it will be able to secrete if the cell is
activated. When an antigen -- for example, polio virus --
is injected into an animal, it circulates among the
lymphocytes in the body. The vast majority of resting B
lymphocytes express surface antibodies that cannot bind
polio; these cells cannot be activated by the virus and
therefore remain in a resting state and do not secrete
antibody. But the virus will bind to the rare B lymphocytes
displaying antibodies that can bind to polio. Binding of
the virus to these cells triggers them into action: they
proliferate, producing many daughter cells -- clones -- all
capable of making antibodies that can bind to the virus.
Then these activated progeny cells turn into miniature
factories pouring out large quantities of anti-polio
antibody. This mechanism explains how each antigen can
trigger the production of just those antibodies capable of
binding to it. The clonal selection theory was verified
through a series of elegant experiments in the 1960's (Ada
&amp; Nossal Scientific American 257;62, 1987).</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/fitness/fig1.gif" alt="[Fig1]"
width="400" height="306" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 1.</b> Clonal selection theory. Before
exposure to antigen, millions of lymphocytes (three are
shown in the top panel) circulate around the body in a
resting state. Each cell displays on its surface many
copies of a Y shaped antibody molecule (although only one
molecule is drawn for each cell in the figure), but each
cell makes a slightly different antibody. If any cell
encounters an antigen (shown as floating black triangles in
the figure) that its antibody can bind, that cell becomes
activated (as shown for the middle cell in the top panel).
The activated cell proliferates into a clone of many
daughter cells, each expressing the same antibody on its
surface (middle panel). The activated cells in this clone
then mature into cells that can secrete antibody molecules
into the circulation (bottom panel); all these antibody
molecules will be able to bind the antigen that initially
stimulated the original B cell. The model described here is
a somewhat simplified version of the established
theory.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<h3>3.2 Answer #2: Diversity through combinatorial
assembly</h3>

<p>The second question -- how the myriad antigen
specificities are encoded in the immunoglobulin gene DNA --
was solved by sequence analysis of homogeneous antibodies
and their genes. These studies revealed that each antibody
molecule is composed of four protein chains (see Figure 2):
two identical large proteins (heavy chains) and two
identical smaller light chains. The amino acid sequences of
these chains were found to have an unusual property: the
first hundred or so amino acids of each chain form a domain
that is different for virtually every antibody that is
sequenced ("variable" or V region), while the rest of the
sequence is identical for every antibody chain of a
particular class ("constant" or C region). (Among light and
heavy chains there are about ten different classes of
antibody chains, but the distinctions between these classes
are irrelevant to this discussion.) Not surprisingly, the
variable domains are involved in binding to the diverse
possible antigens. The second question considered above can
then be reformulated: how can the diversity of amino acid
sequences of the variable regions of antibody proteins be
encoded in the DNA, and how do the constant regions stay
constant in the face of such variable region diversity?</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/fitness/fig2.gif" alt="[Fig2]"
width="530" height="422" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 2.</b> Constructing antibodies and their
genes. The top panel shows how the Y-shaped antibody
molecule (at left) is composed of two identical light
chains and two identical heavy chains; the individual
protein chains are pictured in the middle and right of this
panel. In this panel the portions of each protein that have
constant (C) sequences are shown in black, while the
variable (V) regions are gray or hatched. The middle panel
shows the DNA structure of the antibody variable region
genes in their assembled form found in B lymphocytes. The
light chain variable gene is composed of two elements -- VL
and JL -- joined together, whereas the heavy chain gene is
composed of VH, D and JH elements. The bottom panel shows
how the elements that form the light and heavy variable
region genes are organized before they are assembled in B
lymphocytes. A cluster of separate VL regions lies some
distance in the DNA away from the cluster of J region
genes. Similarly the VH, D and JH region genes form
separate clusters. Each B lymphocyte joins one VL and one
JL to form the assembled light chain variable region, and
one VH, one D and one JH to form the assembled heavy chain
variable region gene.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>These questions yielded a truly amazing answer, which is
described in simplified outline as follows. It turns out
that the gene that encodes each antibody variable region is
created within each B lymphocyte by DNA rearrangements that
join elements that are separated in all the non-lymphoid
cells of the body (Tonegawa, Nature 302:575, 1983; see
Figure 2, middle and bottom panels). Thus lymphocytes are
an exception to the general rule that all cells of the body
have the same DNA sequence. A heavy chain variable region
gene is made by assembling three elements -- known as VH, D
and JH -- and the comparable light chain variable region is
made of two elements: VL and JL. These five types of
elements are often referred to as "germline" elements,
since they are separated in the DNA of germ cells (egg and
sperm). Each human B lymphocyte can choose, Chinese menu
style, one VH (out of about 50), one DH (out of 23), one JH
(out of 6), one VL (out of 57) and one JL (out of 9); but
there is only one gene for each class of the constant
regions, so these domains do not vary for all antibodies of
a given class. The number of possible different
combinations of these germline elements is impressively
large, but the number of possible antibodies is even larger
because extra sequence variation occurs where the germline
elements are joined together. The repertoire from the
variable gene assembly process -- an estimated 30 million
possible amino acid sequences from less than 200 separate
genetic elements -- makes it likely that, for most foreign
antigens, there will be antibody on the surface of some B
lymphocytes that can bind the antigen, with low affinity
perhaps, but enough to initiate an immune response. The
elucidation of the unique DNA rearrangements that underlie
antibody gene generation solved the second of the three
mysteries of antibody formation, how millions of antibody
structures can be generated in organisms having only about
100,000 genes. For his contribution to solving this
problem, Susumu Tonegawa was awarded the 1987 Nobel Prize
in Physiology and Medicine..</p>

<h3>3.3 Answer #3: Evolution of affinity</h3>

<p>It is in considering the third and last question -- how
antibody affinity increases during an immune response --
that we come to the <i>raison d'etre</i> of this article,
for investigations have clearly shown that the mechanism of
the affinity rise that progressively improves the
efficiency of antibody function is random mutation and
selection. The evidence comes from analysis of several
immune responses in inbred strains of mice, which all paint
the same general picture (Wysocki et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 83:1847, 1986; Griffiths et al. Nature 312:271, 1984).
The responses are analyzed by determining the antibody gene
structures from B lymphocytes taken before and at different
times after immunization with an antigen (see Figure 3).
Before immunization and during the first few days after
immunization, any antigen-binding cells express antibody
gene sequences derived from unaltered combinations of the
germline elements described above. But beginning after
about a week, the sequences clearly show evidence of
mutation: many sequences are different from the germline
elements from which they were constructed. Because the
animals in these experiments are inbred, all the
individuals are like identical twins, born with identical
DNA sequences in all their genes. In particular, the
sequences of their germline variable region gene elements
are all known, so that any immunoglobulin sequences
differing from the corresponding germline genes must be the
result of mutations that occurred during the development of
the B lymphocyte, i.e. somatic mutations.</p>

<center>
<table summary="">
<tr>
<td align="center">
<p><img src="/faqs/fitness/fig3.gif" alt="[Fig3]"
width="504" height="335" align="bottom" /></p>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<p><b>Figure 3.</b> The evidence for somatic mutation. In
this type of experiment, an inbred mouse is injected with
an antigen. After 1 week or 2 weeks (or more) B lymphocytes
are obtained from the mice and the sequence of the relevant
antibody gene (the light chain gene VL-JL is pictured in
the figure) is determined and compared to the corresponding
germline element sequences. After one week all the antibody
gene sequences are identical to those of the germline
elements, but by two weeks, multiple mutations (indicated
by various shaped flags in the figure) can be observed.
Mutations that are shared between several different genes
(black symbols) allow construction of a genealogical tree
(right) that depicts the presumed sequence of mutational
events. In this genealogy, the progenitor B cell is shown
at the top. Distinct mutations occur in various lines
leading to progeny expressing some shared and some unique
mutations. Frequently -- and mirroring the situation in
phylogenetic evolution -- sequences representing
"transitional" B cells at the precise divergence point
between two sublineages (the cells marked A and B in the
figure), are not recovered; but their existence and
sequence can be deduced from the pattern of shared
mutations among the available sequences.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<p>This somatic mutation process has several interesting
properties. It occurs only in B lymphocytes and only when
these cells are at a particular developmental stage and
location in the "germinal center" of lymphoid tissues
(Jacob et al., Nature 354:389, 1991). The process increases
the normally low level of mutation (due to rare errors in
the copying of DNA) by more than a thousand-fold, and has
therefore been termed "hypermutation." The mutations occur
almost exclusively in antibody genes, though recent data
suggest that some other genes that are specifically
expressed in germinal center B cells may also be affected
(Shen et al, Science 280:1750, 1998). In antibody genes the
mutations are found only in the region of an assembled
variable domain gene, and not in the constant region
(Lebecque and Gearhart J Exp Med 172:1717, 1990) or in
unassembled variable region genes not expressed in a given
B lymphocyte (Gorski et al., Science 220:1179, 1983). Yet,
aside from their clustering near the assembled variable
region genes, the mutations appear to be random. Different
mutations occur in different cells, without a clear pattern
in the nucleotide changes. Although some "hotspots" have
been noted, i.e. short regions that show higher than
average mutations (Levy et al. J Exp Med 168:475, 1988),
most of the mutations are scattered around the targeted
variable region gene. Some mutations do not alter the amino
acid encoded in the gene; indeed, some fall completely
outside the coding region of the gene in nearby "spacer"
DNA where they can have no effect on the antibody produced
by the cell. Scientists have been able to isolate and
sequence mutated antibody genes from a single animal
(Clarke et al., J Exp Med 161:687, 1985), or even from
individual lymphocytes isolated from a single germinal
center (Kuppers et al, EMBO J 12:4955, 1993). With this
information one can construct a genealogical tree of
antibody sequences -- much like the diagrams of species
divergence that illustrate evolutionary genealogies -- by
assuming that progeny of a particular B lymphocyte
underwent several successive rounds of mutation (see Figure
3, right). Accordingly, identical mutations appearing in
several independent sequences reflect mutational events
that occurred early in the hypermutation process in an
ancestral cell, while mutations unique to one sequence must
have occurred in the later generations of that cell. The
mutated antibodies isolated late in an immune response
generally show higher binding affinity for antigen. In some
cases the functional effects of individual mutations have
been analyzed by engineering antibodies with different
subsets of the mutations observed in a high affinity
antibody. By comparing of the affinities of these
engineered antibodies, scientists can deduce which
mutations contributed to the increased affinity and which
were incidental.</p>

<h2>4. Evolution of antibody sequences</h2>

<p>The model deduced from these findings provides an
unambiguous biological example of the power of random
mutations and selection. (The current model as understood
by molecular immunologists is slightly more complex than
described below, but does not differ in any features
relevant to the logic of this essay.) When antigen enters
the body, it triggers a small number of B lymphocytes --
namely those whose surface antibody can bind the antigen --
to multiply and secrete antibody. These early responding
antibody sequences are made of assembled germline gene
elements in unmutated form, and frequently have low
affinity. Furthermore, these antibodies were not "designed"
to bind the antigen; they were proteins that happened to
pre-exist in the body before any exposure to the novel
challenge with antigen. As the immune response continues,
the antigen-activated B cells move to germinal centers.
Hypermutation begins, and starts generating antibodies with
altered structures. The hypermutation mechanism acts
randomly and independently in the different clonal progeny
cells, introducing essentially random alterations in the
antibody sequence in each cell. Most cells undergoing
hypermutation end up producing antibody with unaltered or
reduced affinity for the antigen; the latter cells would no
longer be activated by antigen. However, rare mutations
lead to antibodies of higher affinity for antigen. As the
existing antibodies help to remove progressively more
antigen from the circulation and the antigen concentration
falls, selection for high affinity becomes the crucial
factor in determining which cells will be stimulated by
antigen. With lower amounts of antigen present, the cells
expressing low affinity antibody on their surface become
progressively less able to bind and be stimulated by
antigen; in the environment of the germinal center, these
poorly stimulated B cells are programmed to die by a
specific process known as "apoptosis." (Choe et al, J
Immunol 157:1006,1996) In contrast, the cells with high
affinity antibody continue to bind antigen, and thus
continue be stimulated to proliferate and secrete antibody.
As the antigen concentration progressively falls while
mutation and selection continue, the intensity of the
selective pressure for high affinity increases. Repeated
cycles of mutation and selection can lead to affinity
levels 100-fold higher than that of the original unmutated
antibody. The "competition" for efficient antigen binding
has been shown to be the selective force driving the rise
in antibody affinity, since if antigen is repeatedly
administered to prevent the drop in antigen level and
thereby eliminate the selective pressure for efficient
antigen binding, antibody affinity does not rise (Eisen and
Siskind, Biochemistry 3:996, 1964). Furthermore, when
selection pressure has been experimentally removed by
engineering mice with impaired capacity for programmed
death by apoptosis, many B cells are found that make
mutated antibodies with low affinity (Takahashi et al. J
Exp Med. 190:39, 1999).</p>

<p>Late in the course of an immune response, as antigen
becomes completely cleared from the bloodstream the amount
of antibody secreted gradually falls and the immune
response ends; but a subset of the last group of highly
efficient cells persists as a quiescent population known as
"memory cells," ready to respond with rapid secretion of
high affinity antibody should they ever be triggered by
another encounter with the same antigen in the future.</p>

<h2>5. Conclusion</h2>

<p>Clearly what we observe in the antibody response is
evolution in miniature. In this model we can learn the
structure of each antibody gene at the beginning of the
experiment before the challenge with antigen, and observe
the accumulation of randomly induced mutations under
natural selection for progressively improved function. This
model of evolution is similar to the computer simulation
discussed earlier, but it has three advantages as a
persuasive example. First, it is a natural biological
phenomenon rather than a theoretical designed simulation.
Second, the initial unmutated sequence is selected for its
ability to bind the antigen molecule, so it clearly has
some function (which must be "undesigned," since the
antigen may be a novel synthetic chemical never found in
nature). In contrast, critics of Dawkins's weasel model
argue that it is unreasonable to assume that the initial
random sequence chosen by the computer could have any
function at all. Third and finally, as in real phylogenetic
evolution, the selection pressure is for biological
function rather than for a specific target sequence chosen
by an intelligent "creator." Thus the different sets of
mutations observed in different high affinity antibodies
that bind the same antigen represent alternative solutions
to a particular selective challenge, just as different
globin sequences in different species represent alternative
solutions to the need for an oxygen-carrying protein.</p>

<p>Obviously there are differences between this kind of
antibody evolution and the phylogenetic evolution that
produced the diversity of plants and animals that we find
on our planet. But none of these differences critically
weaken the logic of the analogy between these two kinds of
evolution as examples of random mutation and selection.
Both involve sequences altered by random mutations,
including rare beneficial alterations that "take over" the
population because of their increased efficiency in
proliferating under selective pressure; then these mutants
are themselves "taken over" by later mutations, leading to
progressively more efficient structures.</p>

<p>Thus the molecular immunogenetics evidence of antibody
evolution that I have described makes it clear that,
contrary to the creationists' claims, the combination of
random mutation and selection CAN be a potent creative
biological engine for the generation of progressive
functional improvements. This evidence alone does not prove
that life evolved as Darwin suggested, but it highlights
the emptiness of another invalid, though superficially
appealing, creationist objection to evolution: the false
idea that random mutation is a uniformly deleterious
process that could never be the source of improved
biological function. And, to people who can appreciate the
amazing complexity of life as a thing of wonder, the story
of the generation of antibody diversity reveals in the
immune system another example of an undesigned but
beautifully functioning system.</p>

<h2>6. Creationist responses</h2>

<p>The evolution of antibody gene affinity by mutation and
natural selection has not been widely cited to counter the
creationist claim that mutations can never lead to improved
fitness. However, I have presented this argument at several
debates with creationist spokesman Duane Gish of the
Institute for Creation Research, who received a Ph.D. in
biochemistry. Below I consider the two objections raised by
Dr. Gish to the antibody evolution argument.</p>

<h3>6.1 Evolution of mutated antibodies would be too
slow.</h3>

<p>As described below, Gish has rejected the idea of
somatic mutation of antibody genes, stating at a public
debate with me that "a sick person would die" before
high-affinity mutated antibodies could evolve. This claim
reveals Gish's ignorance of immunology. There are many
immune mechanisms other than antigen-specific antibodies
that protect us in the early stages of infection before the
highest affinity antibodies are made. These include
cell-mediated immunity as well as the mechanisms referred
to as "innate," "non-specific," or "non-adaptive" immunity,
which include effects of C-reactive protein,
maltose-binding protein, NRAMP-1, cytokine-induced
macrophage activation, peptides such as magainins and
defensins, etc. Moreover, "natural antibody," a mixture of
antibodies present in normal serum in the absence of an
intentional immunization, can confer some protection
against certain infections before significant somatic
mutation can occur. In fact, patients who make no
antibodies at all as a result of a genetic defect are able
to handle some types of infection without great difficulty.
For all these reasons, Gish is completely wrong in his idea
that the notion of somatic mutation predicts that we would
die from trivial infections before high affinity antibodies
evolve.</p>

<h3>6.2 Mutations could produce auto-antibodies</h3>

<p>In private correspondence with me after one of our
debates, Gish mentioned another reason why he disbelieved
the mutation/selection model of antibody evolution: he felt
that if the model were true then random mutations might
lead to an antibody that could bind to the body's own
molecules, causing an immune attack on our own tissues or
"auto-immunity." Certainly auto-immune diseases exist; and
in several autoimmune diseases that have been studied,
mutated antibodies indeed appear to play a pathogenic role.
However, somatic mutation does not routinely cause these
diseases because the immune system has several complex
mechanisms that prevent auto-immune responses. These
protective mechanisms go under the general name of
"tolerance," and include clonal deletion, receptor editing,
anergy, veto cells, and suppressor cells, although we do
not yet have a complete understanding of tolerance.
Auto-immune diseases can occur when the tolerance
mechanisms somehow fail and allow the production of
anti-self antibodies, whether generated by somatic mutation
or variable gene assembly recombination. But apparently in
most individuals, the tolerance mechanisms are efficient
enough to prevent mutated genes encoding auto-antibodies
from causing pathology; cells harboring such genes are
inactivated, forced to change their expressed antibody
gene, or killed. Because of the effectiveness of tolerance
mechanisms, the benefits of increased antibody affinity
achieved by somatic mutation outweigh the risks of
auto-immunity.</p>

<h3>6.3. The antibody system shows evidence of design</h3>

<p>At my most recent debate with Dr. Gish, he claimed that
the model of antibody mutation I described is so complex
that it argued for a "designer" and therefore against
evolution. This claim of complexity is an evasion that
sidesteps my argument instead of rebutting it. Whether the
antibody system requires complex mechanisms that appear
"designed" is totally irrelevant to the fact that the
improvement in antibody affinity derives from random
mutations.  Regardless of the complexity of the selection
system, creationists claim that random mutations are
detrimental, and that according to principles of
information theory improved "fitness" cannot derive from
random mutations.  The antibody example refutes their
claims; and that is all I was trying to show in my
essay.</p>

<p>Furthermore, the notion that complexity in living
organisms implies a "designer" simply begs the question at
issue. Certainly we have in living organisms evidence for
astoundingly complex mechanisms that perform complex
adaptive functions and that resemble in some respects
mechanisms designed by intelligent humans.  But
evolutionists believe that this resemblance is misleading;
they hypothesize that astoundingly complex adaptations can
arise from simple organisms by evolutionary mechanisms,
without intelligent design.  Therefore, complexity does not
imply a "designer" unless one begs the question by a priori
excluding the evolutionary explanation for complexity.</p>

<h3>6.4 A postscript on creationist standards of scientific
scholarship</h3>

<p>At my debates with Dr. Gish I have stressed my view that
"creation science" is actually pseudoscience, and that the
failure of its proponents to present their arguments in the
peer-reviewed scientific literature reveals the status of
their scholarship to be on par with that of dowsers, UFO
enthusiasts and believers in a "Flat Earth." Whatever
success creationists have had in promoting "creation
science" depends on presenting their case before naive
audiences untrained in science, who have insufficient
background to recognize the false logic and false claims on
which creationism rests. Gish always counters that
creationists are excellent scientists whose work does not
get chosen for publication in mainstream science journals
only because of the prejudice of journal editors and
reviewers against creationists. But at the debates I point
out numerous examples of poor scholarship by creationists
that completely explain why their efforts don't meet the
standards of excellence for scientific publication. Gish's
attempts to rebut the model of antibody evolution have
presented a revealing example of his own scientific
scholarship.</p>

<p>When confronted with the argument about evolution of
antibody affinity in several of our debates, Gish simply
denied that somatic mutation of antibody genes occurs. He
claimed that the idea is controversial and that he was
surprised that I believed it. In <a
href="http://www.icr.org/pubs/imp/imp-275.htm">his own
account of an earlier debate</a>, Gish writes: "He [Gish]
stated flatly that a sick person would die long before
random chance mutations could ever produce the necessary
antibodies to fight off an infection, and that the body has
a mechanism for synthesizing antibodies precisely designed
to protect it." Gish's account of the debate omits what
happened next. I pointed out that the study of antibody
genes was my field of scientific expertise, and that I was
aware of many experiments described in the scientific
literature that provided abundant evidence for the
phenomenon, but I knew of no evidence against it. I
challenged Gish to explain the flaws in these published
experiments or to cite a single scientific study that
contradicted them. As I expected, Gish could do neither;
moreover, he could not offer any support for his claim that
somatic mutation is controversial. I then lamented the fact
that Dr. Gish could claim expertise in biochemistry and yet
deny a phenomenon so important and well-accepted that it is
taught to first-year biochemistry students; I had found
discussions of antibody mutation in all five introductory
biochemistry textbooks that I examined in a recent visit to
a local bookstore. Gish responded that the question of
antibody genes was a deep mystery and that anyone who
solved it would get the Nobel prize. I then pointed out
that a Nobel Prize had in fact been awarded to Susumu
Tonegawa several years ago for exactly that achievement.
Gish appeared to be ignorant not only of somatic mutation
but also of the basic biochemistry of antibody genes that
received considerable publicity in newspapers, magazines
and TV when Tonegawa's award was announced.</p>

<p>How would a legitimate scientist -- adhering to the
normal standards of scientific scholarship and honesty --
have acted if confronted with an argument that he was
unfamiliar with and that challenged his own views? He
would, in my opinion, have admitted his ignorance of this
topic and deferred judgment until he could examine the
details of the science; and after the debate he would have
immediately checked the literature relating to the new
argument to see if his own views needed correcting. In
contrast, after Dr. Gish heard from me about somatic
mutation of antibody genes in one debate, and after denying
that somatic mutation occurred, he apparently failed to
investigate the published scientific literature on this
issue, since he made the same false argument in subsequent
debates. Dr. Gish was apparently willing to argue against
an expert in a field Gish knew almost nothing about. I feel
that this shameless bluffing in front of a naive and
trusting audience makes clear the low standard of
scientific scholarship of the most vocal spokesman of
"creationist science." And given this low standard, there
is no need to hypothesize prejudice to explain why his and
other creationist arguments are rejected by the scientific
community. Other examples documenting the low level of
Gish's scientific scholarship are found at the following
URLs:</p>

<ul>
<li><a
href="/faqs/homs/gishwadjak.html">
http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/gishwadjak.html</a></li>

<li><a
href="http://mypage.direct.ca/w/writer/gish.html">http://mypage.direct.ca/w/writer/gish.html</a></li>

<li><a
href="/faqs/cre-error.html">http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/cre-error.html</a></li>
</ul>

<h2>7. Future updates</h2>

<p>I welcome Email responses from readers. This posting
will be updated as necessary to accommodate such responses.
Indeed, several such changes have already been made in the
version currently posted.</p>

<p>A draft of this essay was sent to Dr. Gish for comments
in March of 1999; he wrote back that he would provide a
rebuttal, but that he was too busy to respond immediately.
As of the date of this update, he has not responded. If he
ever does provide a rebuttal, this posting will be updated
to reflect his response. <!-- begin trailer -->
<br clear="all" />
</p>

<div><map name="ltrailermap" id="ltrailermap">
<area shape="rect" coords="0,0,96,27" href="/" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="97,0,191,27"
href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="192,0,287,27"
href="/origins/search.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="288,0,383,27"
href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="384,0,481,27"
href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,29,160,55"
href="/origins/faqs-qa.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,29,319,55"
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,29,480,55"
href="/origins/faqs-index.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,56,160,82"
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,56,319,82"
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,56,480,82"
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,83,160,109"
href="/origins/faqs-flood.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,83,319,109"
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,83,480,109"
href="/origins/faqs-debates.html" alt="" />
</map></div>

<center>
<p><a href="/scripts/imagemap/ltrailer.map"><img
src="/pictures/ltrailer.gif" usemap="#ltrailermap"
width="481" height="110" alt="" ismap="ismap"
border="0" /></a></p>

<p class="minus1"><a href="/">Home Page</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs.html">Browse</a> | <a
href="/origins/search.html">Search</a> | <a
href="/origins/feedback.asp">Feedback</a> | <a
href="/origins/other-links.html">Links</a><br />
 <a href="/origins/faqs-qa.html">The FAQ</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html">Must-Read Files</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-index.html">Index</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html">Creationism</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html">Evolution</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html">Age of the Earth</a> |
<a href="/origins/faqs-flood.html">Flood Geology</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html">Catastrophism</a> |
<a href="/origins/faqs-debates.html">Debates</a></p>
</center>

<!-- end trailer -->
</body>
</html>


