ID=H0916
URL=http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/comdesc/section2.html
SIZE=56387
DATE=11/07/2002
TIME=17:09:10
DATASET=Biology
HTML=<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
<meta name="generator"
content="HTML Tidy for Mac OS, see www.w3.org" />
<title>29 Evidences for Macroevolution: Part 2</title>
<meta name="Description" content="This article directly addresses the
scientific evidences in favor of macroevolutionary theory and common descent.
It is specifically intended for those who are scientifically minded but, for
one reason or another, have come to believe that macroevolutionary theory
explains little, makes few or no testable predictions, or cannot be falsified."
/> 
<link rel="stylesheet" href="29EfM.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/pictures/to.ico" />
</head>

<body>

<!-- begin header -->
<div>
<map name="headermap" id="headermap">
 <area shape="rect" coords="159,63,254,99" href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="Browse" />
 <area shape="rect" coords="255,63,353,99" href="/origins/search.html" alt="Search" />
 <area shape="rect" coords="354,63,451,99" href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="Feedback" />
 <area shape="rect" coords="452,63,548,99" href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="Other Links" />
 <area shape="rect" coords="0,0,158,99" href="/" alt="Home" />
 <area shape="rect" coords="159,0,559,62" href="/" alt="Home" />
</map> 
</div>

<center>
<p>

<img src="/pictures/header.gif" usemap="#headermap" width="560"
height="100" border="0" alt="The Talk.Origins Archive" ismap="ismap" />
<br />
</p>

<div><h1 class="plus2">29 Evidences for Macroevolution</h1><br />
<h2 class="plus1">Part 2:<br />
 Past History</h2>

<br />

<small>Copyright &copy; 1999-2002 by <a
href="mailto:dtheobald@hotmail.com">Douglas Theobald,
Ph.D.</a></small>
</div>

<img src="/pictures/thicksep.gif" alt="" width="560"
height="10" />
</center>

<!-- end header -->
<center>
<table cellpadding="10" summary="">
<tr align="center">
<td> <a href="section1.html"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_l.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Previous</a> </td>
<td> <a href="/faqs/comdesc/"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_u.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Contents</a> </td>
<td> <a href="section3.html"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_r.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Next</a> </td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<div>

<p> <img alt="B" align="left" src="/pictures/letters/B.gif" width="42"
height="45" />y studying the standard phylogenetic tree, it can be seen that
every species has a unique genealogical history. Each species has a unique
series of common ancestors linking it to the original common ancestor. We
should expect that organisms carry evidence of this history and ancestry with
them. The standard phylogenetic tree predicts what historical evidence is
possible and what is impossible for each given species. </p>

<br />
</div>

<div>
<h3>Part 2 Outline</h3>

<ol>
<li><a href="#morphological_vestiges">Anatomical vestigial structures</a></li>

<li><a href="#atavisms">Atavisms</a></li>

<li><a href="#molecular_vestiges">Molecular vestigial structures</a></li>

<li><a href="#ontogeny">Ontogeny and developmental biology</a></li>

<li><a href="#present_biogeography">Present biogeography</a></li>

<li><a href="#past_biogeography">Past biogeography</a>

<ul>
<li><a href="#past_biogeography_ex1">Example 1: marsupials</a></li>
<li><a href="#past_biogeography_ex2">Example 2: horses</a></li>
<li><a href="#past_biogeography_ex3">Example 3: apes and humans</a></li>
</ul>
</li>

</ol>

<br />
</div>

<div>
<h2><a id="pred6" name="pred6"></a><a id="morphological_vestiges"
name="morphological_vestiges"></a>Prediction 2.1: Anatomical vestiges</h2>

<table align="left" width="250" cellpadding="10" summary="Various organisms
displaying vestigial characters">
<tr align="center">
<td align="center"> <a id="fig2.1.1" name="fig2.1.1"></a>
<img src="images/blind_salamander.jpg" width="200" height="130"
alt="[Figure2.1.1 (blind cave salamander)]" />
<img src="images/Mexican_tetra.jpg" width="250" height="93" alt="[Figure2.1.1
(blind cave fish, the Mexican tetra)]" />
<img src="images/flightless_weevil.jpg" width="140" height="145"
alt="[Figure2.1.1 (flightless weevil, apterocyclus_honolulensis)]" />
<img src="images/dandelion.jpg" width="180" height="196"
alt="[Figure2.1.1 (vestigial dandelion]" />
<img src="images/dandelion_pollen.jpg" width="180" height="176"
alt="[Figure2.1.1 (vestigial dandelion pollen)]" />

<p> <b>Figure 2.1.1. Various organisms displaying nonfunctional, vestigial
characters</b>. <small> From top to bottom: A. A blind cave salamander - look
closely for the eyes buried underneath the skin. B. <i>Astyanax mexicanus</i>,
the Mexican tetra, a blind cave fish. C. <i>Apterocyclus honolulensis</i>, a
flightless weevil. The black wing covers cannot open, as they are fused, yet
underneath are perfectly formed beetle wings. D. The nonfunctional flower of
<i>Taraxacum officinale</i>, the common dandelion. E. A nonfunctional pollen
grain from the dandelion. </small> </p>

</td>
</tr>
</table>

<p> Some of the more renowned evidences for evolution are the various
nonfunctional or rudimentary <a href="glossary.html#vestigial">vestigial</a>
characters, both anatomical and molecular, which are found throughout biology.
During macroevolutionary history, functions necessarily have been gained and
lost. Thus, from common descent and the constraint of gradualism, we predict
that many organisms should display vestigial structures, which are structural
remnants of lost functions. (Note that the exact evolutionary mechanism is
irrelevant here as long as it is a gradual one). Since there is no apparent
reason for their existence, nonfunctional characters can be especially puzzling
features of organisms. Likewise, rudimentary structures are curious, as they
have different and relatively minor <a
href="glossary.html#function">functions</a> compared to the same more developed
structures in other organisms. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> There are many examples of rudimentary and nonfunctional characters carried
by organisms, and these can very often be explained in terms of evolutionary
histories. For example, snakes are known to be the descendants of four-legged
reptiles. Most pythons (which are legless snakes) carry vestigial pelvises
hidden beneath their skin (<a href="#Cohn2001">Cohn 2001</a>; <a
href="#CohnTickle1999">Cohn and Tickle 1999</a>). The vestigial pelvis in
pythons is not attached to vertebrae (as is the normal case in most
vertebrates), and it simply floats in the abdominal cavity. Some lizards carry
rudimentary, nonfunctional legs underneath their skin, undetectable from the
outside <a href="#RaynaudKan1992">(Raynaud and Kan 1992)</a>. Many cave
dwelling animals, such as the fish <i>Astyanax mexicanus</i> (the Mexican
tetra) and the salamander species <i>Typhlotriton spelaeus</i> and <i>Proteus
anguinus</i>, are blind yet have rudimentary, vestigial eyes (<a
href="#BesharseBrandon1976">Besharse and Brandon 1976</a>; <a
href="#Durand_etal1993">Durand et al. 1993</a>; <a href="#Jeffery2001">Jeffery
2001</a>; <a href="#Kos_etal2001">Kos et al. 2001</a>). The eyes of the Mexican
tetra have a lens, a degenerate retina, a degenerate optic nerve, and a sclera,
even though the tetra has no use for them, even though the eyes cannot see (<a
href="#Jeffery2001">Jeffery 2001</a>). The blind salamanders have eyes with
retinas and lenses, yet the eyelids grow over the eye, sealing them from
outside light (<a href="#Durand_etal1993">Durand et al. 1993</a>; <a
href="#Kos_etal2001">Kos et al. 2001</a>).  Dandelions reproduce without
reproduction (a condition known as <i>apomixis</i>), yet they retain flowers
and produce pollen (both are sexual organs normally used for sexual
fertilization) (<a href="#Mes_etal2002">Mes et al. 2002</a>).  Flowers and
pollen are thus useless characters for dandelions. The ancestors of humans are
known to have been herbivorous, and molar teeth are required for chewing and
grinding plant material. Over 90% of all adult humans develop third molars
(otherwise known as wisdom teeth). Usually these teeth never erupt from the
gums, and in one third of all individuals they are malformed and impacted (<a
href="#Hattab_etal1995">Hattab et al. 1995</a>; <a
href="#Schersten_etal1989">Schersten et al. 1989</a>). These useless structures
can cause significant pain, increased risk for injury, and may result in
illness and even death (<a href="#Litonjua1996">Litonjua 1996</a>; <a
href="#Obiechina_etal2001">Obiechina et al. 2001</a>; <a
href="#Rakprasitkul2001">Rakprasitkul 2001</a>; <a
href="#TevepaughDodson1995">Tevepaugh and Dodson 1995</a>). There are many
examples of flightless beetles (such as the weevils of the genus Lucanidae)
which retain perfectly formed wings housed underneath fused wing covers. All of
these examples can be explained in terms of the beneficial functions and
structures of the organisms' predicted ancestors (<a
href="#Futuyma1998">Futuyma 1998</a>, pp. 122-123). </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> No organism can have a vestigial structure that was not previously
functional in one of its ancestors. Thus, for each species, the standard
phylogenetic tree makes a huge number of predictions about vestigial characters
that are allowed and those that are impossible for any given species. </p>

<p> Shared derived characters and molecular sequence data, not vestigial
characters, determine the phylogeny and the characteristics of predicted common
ancestors. Thus, if common descent is false, vestigial characters very possibly
could lack an evolutionary explanation. For example, whales are classified as
mammals according to many criteria, such as having mammary glands, a placenta,
one bone in the lower jaw, etc. Snakes likewise are classified as reptiles by
several other derived features. However, it is theoretically possible that
snakes or whales could have been classified as fish (as Linnaeus originally
did). If this were the case, the vestigial legs of whales or the vestigial
pelvises of snakes would make no sense evolutionarily and would be inconsistent
with common descent. </p>

<p> It follows, then, that we should never find a vestigial placenta or
vestigial nipples in any amphibians, birds, or reptiles. No mammals should be
found with vestigial feathers (but they can have vestigial tails, as humans
do). We should never find any arthropods with vestigial backbones. </p>

<p> Note that this prediction is not invalidated by finding a function for the
presumed vestigial structure. Should this happen, the structure merely becomes
an example of paralogy, which is considered in <a
href="section3.html#morphological_paralogy">prediction 3.1</a>, or, more
likely, an example of inefficient design, which is considered in <a
href="section3.html#morphological_inefficiency">prediction 3.5</a>. Some
anti-evolutionist authors have erroneously concluded that it is scientifically
and theoretically impossible to demonstrate that a structure has no <a
href="glossary.html#function">function</a> (e.g., see <a
href="#Ham_etal1990">Ham et al. 1990</a>; <a href="#Scadding1981">Scadding
1981</a>). Such nihilistic philosophies have no place in practical science.
This erroneous conclusion is based upon the false premise that negative
evidence cannot be used in science to test a hypothesis. However, negative
evidence certainly is admissible if it is acquired with the proper experimental
controls. It is obvious that negative evidence is scientifically useful by
considering the following analogy with physics - if it is impossible to
demonstrate that a certain structure has no function, then by the same logic it
is impossible to demonstrate that a given atomic element is not radioactive.
However, it is well-established in physics that lead-207 is not radioactive. We
know this because radioactivity is detectable from other elements, such as
phosphorous-32, yet simultaneously radioactivity is undetectable from lead-207.
In this physics example phosphorous-32 is a positive control, which is needed
to use the negative evidence gathered from lead-207. Likewise, we can certainly
demonstrate that a given structure has no function when we can simultaneously
detect a beneficial function from another demonstrably useful structure in the
same environment. </p>

<h2><a id="atavisms" name="atavisms"></a>Prediction 2.2: Atavisms</h2>

<p> Anatomical atavisms are closely related conceptually to vestigial
structures. An <i>atavism</i> is the reappearance of a lost character specific
to a remote evolutionary ancestor and not observed in the parents or recent
ancestors of the organism displaying the atavistic character. Atavisms have
several essential features: (1) presence in adult stages of life, (2) absence
in parents or recent ancestors, and (3) extreme rarity in a population (<a
href="#Hall1984">Hall 1984</a>). Of course, without an evolutionary perspective
we could not state that an atavism is a structure that was once found in a
remote ancestor but has been lost in a recent lineage. Therefore, here we are
primarily concerned with potential atavistic structures that are characteristic
of taxa to which the organism displaying the structure does <i>not</i> belong.
As a hypothetical example, if mutant horses occasionally displayed gills, this
would be considered a potential atavism, since gills are diagnostic of taxa
(e.g. fish) to which horses do not belong. For developmental reasons, the
occasional occurrence of atavisms is expected under common descent if
structures or functions are lost between ancestor and descendant lineages (<a
href="#Hall1984">Hall 1984</a>; <a href="#Hall1995">Hall 1995</a>). As with
vestigial structures, no organism can have an atavistic structure that was not
previously found in one of its ancestors. Thus, for each species, the standard
phylogenetic tree makes a huge number of predictions about atavisms that are
allowed and those that are impossible for any given species. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> Probably the most well known case of atavism is found in the whales.
According to the standard phylogenetic tree, whales are known to be the
descendants of terrestrial mammals that had hindlimbs. Thus, we expect the
possibility that rare mutant whales might occasionally develop atavistic
hindlimbs. In fact, there are many cases where whales have been found with
rudimentary atavistic hindlimbs in the wild (for reviews see <a
href="#Berzin1972">Berzin 1972</a>, pp. 65-67 and <a href="#Hall1984">Hall
1984</a>, pp. 90-93). Hindlimbs have been found in baleen whales (<a
href="#Sleptsov1939">Sleptsov 1939</a>), humpback whales (<a
href="#Andrews1921">Andrews 1921</a>) and in many specimens of sperm whales (<a
href="#Abel1908">Abel 1908</a>; <a href="#Berzin1972">Berzin 1972</a>, p. 66;
<a href="#Nemoto1963">Nemoto 1963</a>; <a href="#OgawaKamiya1957">Ogawa and
Kamiya 1957</a>; <a href="#ZembskiiBerzin1961">Zembskii and Berzin 1961</a>).
Most of these examples are of whales with femurs, tibia, and fibulae; however,
some even include feet with complete digits. </p>

<p> Many other famous examples of atavisms exist, including (1) rare formation
of extra toes (2nd and 4th digits) in horses, similar to what is seen in the
archaic horses <i>Mesohippus</i> and <i>Merychippus</i>, (2) atavistic thigh
muscles in Passeriform birds and sparrows, (3) hyoid muscles in dogs, (4) wings
in earwigs (normally wingless), (5) atavistic fibulae in birds (the fibulae are
normally extremely reduced), (6) extra toes in guinea pigs and salamanders, (6)
the atavistic dew claw in many dog breeds, (7) dental enamel in the beaks of
birds, and (8) various atavisms in humans (one described in detail below) (<a
href="#Hall1984">Hall 1984</a>). </p>

<p> Primarily due to intense medical interest, humans are one of the best
characterized species and many developmental anomalies are known. There are
several human atavisms that reflect our common genetic heritage with other
mammals. One of the most striking is the existence of the rare "true human
tail" (also variously known as "coccygeal process," "coccygeal projection,"
"caudal appendage," and "vestigial tail"). More than 100 cases of human tails
have been reported in the medical literature. Less than one third of the
well-documented cases are what are medically known as "pseudo-tails" (<a
href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky 1984</a>; <a
href="#Dubrow_etal1988">Dubrow et al. 1988</a>). Pseudo-tails are not true
tails; they are simply lesions of various types coincidentally found in the
caudal region of newborns, often associated with the spinal column, coccyx, and
various malformations. In contrast, the true atavistic tail of humans develops
from the most distal end of the embryonic tail found in the developing human
fetus (<a href="#Belzberg_etal1991">Belzberg et al. 1991</a>; <a
href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky 1984</a>), and it is usually benign in
nature (<a href="#Dubrow_etal1988">Dubrow et al. 1988</a>; <a
href="#Spiegelmann_etal1985">Spiegelmann et al. 1985</a>). The true human tail
is characterized by a complex arrangement of adipose and connective tissue,
central bundles of longitudinally arranged striated muscle in the core, blood
vessels, nerve fibres, nerve ganglion cells, and specialized pressure sensing
nerve organs (Vater-Pacini corpuscles). It is covered by normal skin, replete
with hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands (<a
href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky 1984</a>; <a
href="#Dubrow_etal1988">Dubrow et al. 1988</a>; <a
href="#Spiegelmann_etal1985">Spiegelmann et al. 1985</a>). True human tails
range in length from about one inch to over 5 inches long (on a newborn baby),
and they can move and contract (<a href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky
1984</a>; <a href="#LundbergParsons1962">Lundberg et al. 1962</a>). Although
they usually lack skeletal structures, they have also been found with cartilage
and multiple articulating vertebrae (<a href="#Fara1977">Fara 1977</a>; <a
href="#Matsuo_etal1993">Matsuo et al. 1993</a>). Caudal vertebrae are not a
necessary component of mammalian tails; contrary to what is frequently reported
in the medical literature, there is at least one known example of a primate
tail which lacks vertebrae, as found in the rudimentary two-inch-long tail of
<i>Macaca sylvanus</i> (the "Barbary ape") (<a href="#Hill1974">Hill 1974</a>,
p. 616; <a href="#Hooten1947">Hooten 1947</a>, p. 23). True human tails are
rarely inherited, though familial cases are known (<a href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao
and Netsky 1984</a>; <a href="#Standfast1992">Standfast 1992</a>). As with
other atavistic structures, human tails are most likely the result of either a
somatic or germline mutation that reactivates an underlying developmental
pathway which has been retained in the human genome (<a
href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky 1984</a>; <a href="#Hall1984">Hall
1984</a>; <a href="#Hall1995">Hall 1995</a>). </p>

<p> It should be noted here that the existence of true human tails is quite
shocking for many religiously motivated anti-evolutionists, such as Duane Gish,
who has written an often-quoted article entitled "<a
href="http://www.icr.org/pubs/imp/imp-117.htm" target="_blank">Evolution and
the human tail</a>" (<a href="#Gish1983">Gish 1983</a>; see also <a
href="#Menton1994">Menton 1994</a>; <a href="#ReMine1982">ReMine 1982</a>).
Solely based on the particulars of a single case study (<a
href="#Ledley1982">Ledley 1982</a>), these authors have erroneously concluded
that atavistic human tails are "nothing more than anomalous malformations not
traceable to any imaginary ancestral state" (<a href="#Gish1983">Gish
1983</a>). However, their arguments are clearly directed against pseudo-tails,
not true tails, since true human tails are complex structures which have
muscle, blood vessels, occasional vertebrae and cartilage (<a
href="#Fara1977">Fara 1977</a>; <a href="#Matsuo_etal1993">Matsuo et al.
1993</a>), they can move and contract, and they are occasionally inherited (<a
href="#DaoNetsky1984">Dao and Netsky 1984</a>; <a
href="#Standfast1992">Standfast 1992</a>). Furthermore, Gish, Menton, and
ReMine all argue that human vestigial tails are not true tails if they lack
vertebrae - an erroneous claim since <i>M. sylvanus</i> is a primate whose
fleshy tail also lacks vertebrae (<a href="#Hill1974">Hill 1974</a>, p. 616; <a
href="#Hooten1947">Hooten 1947</a>, p. 23). </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> These are essentially the same as for vestigial structures above.<br />
</p>

<h2><a id="pred7" name="pred7"></a><a id="molecular_vestiges"
name="molecular_vestiges"></a>Prediction 2.3: Molecular vestigial characters</h2>

<p> Vestigial characters should also be found at the molecular level. Humans do
not have the capability to synthesize ascorbic acid (otherwise known as Vitamin
C), and the unfortunate consequence can be the nutritional deficiency called
scurvy. However, the predicted ancestors of humans had this function (as do
most other animals except primates and guinea pigs). Therefore, we predict that
humans, other primates, and guinea pigs should carry evidence of this lost
function as a molecular vestigial character (<i>nota bene</i>: this very
prediction was explicitly made by Nishikimi and others and was the impetus for
the research detailed below) (<a href="#Nishikimi_etal1992">Nishikimi et al.
1992</a>; <a href="#Nishikimi_etal1994">Nishikimi et al. 1994</a>). </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> Recently, the L-gulano-g-lactone oxidase gene, the gene required for
Vitamin C synthesis, was found in humans and guinea pigs (<a
href="#Nishikimi_etal1992">Nishikimi et al. 1992</a>; <a
href="#Nishikimi_etal1994">Nishikimi et al. 1994</a>). It exists as a
pseudogene, present but incapable of functioning (see <a
href="section4.html#pseudogenes">prediction 4.4</a> for more about
pseudogenes). In fact, since this was originally written the vitamin C
pseudogene has been found in other primates, exactly as predicted by
evolutionary theory. We now have the DNA sequences for this broken gene in
chimpanzees, orangutans, and macaques (<a href="#OhtaNishikimi1999">Ohta and
Nishikimi 1999</a>). And, as predicted, the nonfunctional human and chimpanzee
pseudogenes are the most similar, followed by the human and orangutan genes,
followed by the human and macaque genes, precisely as predicted by evolutionary
theory. Furthermore, all of these genes have accumulated mutations at the exact
rate predicted (the background rate of mutation for neutral DNA regions like
pseudogenes) (<a href="#OhtaNishikimi1999">Ohta and Nishikimi 1999</a>). </p>

<p> There are several other examples of vestigial human genes, including
multiple odorant receptor genes (<a href="#Rouquier_etal2000">Rouquier et al.
2000</a>), the RT6 protein gene (<a href="#Haag_etal1994">Haag et al.
1994</a>), the galactosyl transferase gene (<a href="#GaliliSwanson1991">Galili
and Swanson 1991</a>), and the tyrosinase-related gene (TYRL) (<a
href="#Oetting_etal1993">Oetting et al. 1993</a>). </p>

<p> Our odorant receptor (OR) genes once coded for proteins involved in now
lost olfactory functions. Our predicted ancestors, like other mammals, had a
more acute sense of smell than we do now; humans have &gt;99 odorant receptor
genes, of which ~70% are pseudogenes. Many other mammals, such as mice and
marmosets, have many of the same OR genes as us, but all of theirs actually
work. An extreme case is the dolphin, which is the descendant of land mammals.
It no longer has any need to smell volatile odorants, yet it contains many OR
genes, of which none are functional &ndash; they are all pseudogenes (<a
href="#Freitag_etal1998">Freitag et al. 1998</a>). </p>

<p> The RT6 protein is expressed on the surface of T lymphocytes in other
mammals, but not on ours. The galactosyl transferase gene is involved in making
a certain carbohydrate found on the cell membranes of other mammals. Tyrosinase
is the major enzyme responsible for melanin pigment in all animals. TYRL is a
pseudogene of tyrosinase. </p>

<p> It is satisfying to note that we share these vestigial genes with other
primates, and that the mutations that made these genes nonfunctional are also
shared with several other primates (see <a
href="section4.html#transposons">predictions 4.3-4.5</a> for more about shared
nonfunctional characters). </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> It would be very puzzling if we had not found the L-gulano-g-lactone
oxidase pseudogene or the other vestigial genes mentioned. In addition, we can
predict that we will never find vestigial chloroplast genes in any metazoans
(i.e. animals) (<a href="#Li1997">Li 1997</a>, pp. 284-286, 348-354).<br />
</p>

<h2><a id="pred8" name="pred8"></a><a id="ontogeny"
name="ontogeny"></a>Prediction 2.4: Ontogeny and Development of Organisms</h2>

<table align="left" width="145" cellpadding="10"
summary="Cat and human embryos showing tailbud stage">
<tr align="left">
<td> <a id="fig2.3.1" name="fig2.3.1"></a><img src="images/cat_embryo.jpg"
width="135" height="142" alt="[Figure2.3.1 (cat embryo)]" /> <img
src="images/human_embryo.jpg" width="135" height="142" alt="[Figure2.3.1 (human
embryo)]" /> 

<p> <b>Figure 2.3.1. Cat and human embryos in the tailbud stage</b>. <small> A
cat embryo is shown on top, a human embryo below. Note the post-anal tail in
both, positioned at the lower left below the head of each. The human embryo is
about 32 days old.</small> </p>

</td>
</tr>
</table>

<p> Embryology and developmental biology have provided some fascinating
insights into evolutionary pathways. Since the cladistic morphological
classification of species is generally based on derived characters of adult
organisms, embryology and developmental studies provide a nearly independent
body of evidence. </p>

<p> The ideas of Ernst Haeckel greatly influenced the early history of
embryology; however, his ideas have been superseded by those of Karl Ernst von
Baer, his predecessor. Von Baer suggested that the embryonic stages of an
individual should resemble the embryonic stages of its ancestors (rather than
resembling its adult ancestors, <i>a la</i> Haeckel). The final adult structure
of an organism is the product of numerous cumulative developmental processes;
for species to evolve, there necessarily must have been change in these
developmental processes. The macroevolutionary conclusion is that the
development of an organism is a modification of its ancestors' ontogenies (<a
href="#Futuyma1998">Futuyma 1998</a>, pp. 652-653). The modern developmental
maxim is the inverse of Haeckel's biogenetic law. "Phylogeny recapitulates
Ontogeny," not the opposite. Walter Garstang stated even more correctly that
ontogeny creates phylogeny. What this means is that once given knowledge about
an organism's ontogeny, we can confidently predict certain aspects of the
historical pathway that was involved in this organism's evolution (<a
href="#Gilbert1997">Gilbert 1997</a>, pp. 912-914). Thus, embryology provides
confirmations and predictions about evolution. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> From embryological studies it is known that two bones of a developing
reptile eventually form the quadrate and the articular bones in the hinge of
the adult reptilian jaw (first reported in 1837 by the German embryologist Karl
Reichert). However, in the marsupial mammalian embryo, the same two structures
develop, not into parts of the jaw, but into the anvil and hammer of the
mammalian ear. This indicates that during their evolution, the mammalian middle
ear bones were derived and modified from the reptilian jaw bones (<a
href="#Gilbert1997">Gilbert 1997</a>, pp. 894-896). </p>

<p> Accordingly, there is a very complete series of fossil intermediates in
which these structures are clearly modified from the reptilian jaw to the
mammalian ear (compare the intermediates discussed in <a
href="section1.html#morphological_intermediates_ex2">prediction 1.4, example
2</a>) (<a href="#Carroll1988">Carroll 1988</a>, pp. 392-396; <a
href="#Futuyma1998">Futuyma 1998</a>, pp. 146-151; <a href="#Gould1990">Gould
1990</a>; <a href="#Kardong2002">Kardong 2002</a>, pp. 255-275). </p>

<p> There are numerous other examples in which an organism's evolutionary
history is represented temporarily in its development.  Early in development,
mammalian embryos temporarily have pharyngeal pouches, which are
morphologically indistinguishable from aquatic vertebrate gill pouches (<a
href="#Gilbert1997">Gilbert 1997</a>, pp. 380, 382). This evolutionary relic
reflects the fact that mammalian ancestors were once aquatic gill-breathing
vertebrates. The pharyngeal pouches of modern fish embryos eventually become
perforated to form gills. Mammalian pharyngeal pouches of course do not develop
into gills, but rather give rise to structures that evolved from gills, such as
the eustachian tube, middle ear, tonsils, parathyroid, and thymus (<a
href="#Kardong2002">Kardong 2002</a>, pp. 52, 504, 581). The arches between the
gills, called branchial arches, were present in jawless fish and some of these
branchial arches later evolved into the bones of the jaw, and, eventually, into
the bones of the inner ear as recounted above and in <a
href="section1.html#morphological_intermediates_ex2">prediction 1.4, example
2</a>. </p>

<p> Many species of snakes and legless lizards (such as the "slow worm")
initially develop limb buds in their embryonic development, only to reabsorb
them before hatching (<a href="#Raynaud1990">Raynaud 1990</a>; <a
href="#RaynaudKan1992">Raynaud and Kan 1992</a>; <a
href="#RaynaudVandenElzen1976">Raynaud and Van den Elzen 1976</a>). Similarly,
modern adult whales, dolphins, and porpoises have no hind legs. Even so, hind
legs, complete with various leg bones, nerves, and blood vessels, temporarily
appear in the cetacean fetus and subsequently degenerate before birth (<a
href="#Amasaki_etal1989">Amasaki et al. 1989</a>; <a
href="#Sedmera_etal1997">Sedmera et al. 1997</a>). Humans are classified as
apes; one of the defining derived characters of apes is the lack of a tail.
However, human embryos initially develop tails in development. The cells in the
human tail eventually die during gestation, resulting in a tail-less adult
organism (<a href="#FallonSimandl1978">Fallon and Simandl 1978</a>; <a
href="#Sapunar_etal2001">Sapunar et al. 2001</a>) (see Figure 2.3.1). </p>

<p> Reptiles and birds lay eggs, and the emerging young use either an
"egg-tooth" to cut through a leathery keratinous eggshell (as found in lizards
and snakes) or a specialized structure, called a caruncle, to crack their way
out of a hard calcerous eggshell (as found in turtles and birds). Mammals
evolved from a reptile-like ancestor, and placental mammals (like humans and
dogs) have lost the egg-tooth and caruncle (and, yes, the eggshell). However,
monotremes, such as the platypus and echidna, are primitive mammals that have
<i>both</i> an egg-tooth and a caruncle, even though the monotreme eggshell is
thin and leathery (<a href="#Tyndale-BiscoeRenfree1987">Tyndale-Biscoe and
Renfree 1987</a>, p. 409). Most strikingly, during marsupial development, an
eggshell forms transiently and then is reabsorbed before live birth. Though
they have no need for it, several marsupial newborns (such as baby Brushtail
possums, koalas, and bandicoots) retain a vestigial caruncle as a clear
indicator of their reptilian, oviparous ancestry (<a
href="#Tyndale-BiscoeRenfree1987">Tyndale-Biscoe and Renfree 1987</a>, p. 409).
</p>

<p> From the consensus phylogeny of life, we know that birds evolved from
reptilian ancestors which had teeth, even though no modern living bird has
teeth. Thus we predict that bird ancestors had teeth at some point, and we
predict the possibility that birds may still retain the genetic and
developmental programs that determine tooth growth. The fossil record has
confirmed that birds once had teeth, as demonstrated by the fossils of many
birds with teeth including <i>Archaeopteryx</i>. Furthermore, this predicted
possibility has been confirmed experimentally in a modern bird, the chicken (<a
href="#KollarFisher1980">Kollar and Fisher 1980</a>). </p>

<p> During development in reptiles (and mammals), dental enamel forms from
epithelial tissue which lines the surface of the gum, while the dentin which
makes teeth is produced from a deeper tissue called the mesenchyme. However, in
birds, this epithelial layer normally develops instead into the keratinous
beak.  Kollar and Fisher transplanted a small piece of mammalian mesenchymal
tissue (which forms teeth) underneath the beak-forming epithelial layer of a
developing chick (<a href="#KollarFisher1980">Kollar and Fisher 1980</a>).
Intriguingly, they observed that the chicken epithelium secreted dental enamel
and directed the adjacent mesenchyme to form teeth. This would have been
impossible unless the chicken still retained the genes and developmental
pathway for making teeth. Thus, chickens have not yet completely lost the genes
coding for tooth development. </p>  

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> Based on our standard phylogenetic tree, we may expect to find gill pouches
or egg shells at some point in mammalian embryonic development (and we do), and
we may expect to find human embryos with tails (and we do; see Figure 2.3.1).
However, we never expect to find nipples, hair, or a placenta at any point in
fish, amphibian, or reptilian embryos. Likewise, we might expect to find teeth
in the mouths of some avian embryos (as we do), but we never expect to find
bird-like beaks in eutherian mammal embryos (eutherians are placental mammals
such as humans, cows, dogs, or rabbits) (<a href="#Gilbert1997">Gilbert
1997</a>, esp. Ch. 23). <br /> </p>

<h2><a id="pred9" name="pred9"></a><a id="present_biogeography"
name="present_biogeography"></a>Prediction 2.5: Present biogeography</h2>

<p> Because species divergence happens not only in the time dimension, but also
in spatial dimensions, common ancestors originate in a particular geographical
location. Thus, the spatial and geographical distribution of species should be
consistent with their predicted genealogical relationships. The standard
phylogenetic tree predicts that new species must originate close to the older
species from which they are derived. Closely related contemporary species
should be close geographically, regardless of their habitat or specific
adaptations. If they are not, there had better be a good explanation, such as
extreme mobility (cases like sea animals, birds, human mediated distribution,
etc.), continental drift, or extensive time since their divergence. In this
sense, the present biogeographical distribution of species should reflect the
history of their origination. </p>

<p> A reasonable nonevolutionary prediction is that species should occur
wherever their habitat is. However, macroevolution predicts just the opposite
&ndash; there should be many locations where a given species would thrive yet
is not found there, due to geographical barriers (<a
href="#Futuyma1998">Futuyma 1998</a>, pp. 201-203). </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> With few exceptions, marsupials only inhabit Australia. The exceptions
(some South American species and the opossum) are explained by continental
drift (South America, Australia, and Antarctica were once the continent of
Gondwanaland). Conversely, placental mammals are virtually absent on Australia,
despite the fact that many would flourish there. Humans introduced most of the
few placentals found on Australia, and they have spread rapidly. </p>

<p> Similarly, the southern reaches of South America and Africa and all of
Australia share lungfishes, ostrich-like birds (ratite birds), and
leptodactylid frogs &ndash; all of which occur nowhere else. Alligators, some
related species of giant salamander, and magnolias only occur in Eastern North
America and East Asia (these two locations were once spatially close in the
Laurasian continent). </p>

<p> In addition, American, Saharan and Australian deserts have very similar
habitats, and plants from one grow well in the other. However, indigenous Cacti
only inhabit the Americas, while Saharan and Australian vegetation is very
distantly related (mostly Euphorbiaceae). Humans introduced the only Cacti
found in the Australian outback, and they grow quite well in their new
geographical location. </p>

<p> The west and east coast of South America is very similar in habitat, but
the marine fauna is very different. In addition, members of the closely related
pineapple family inhabit many diverse habitats (such as rainforest, alpine, and
desert areas), but only in the American tropics, not African or Asian tropics
(<a href="#Futuyma1998">Futuyma 1998</a>, ch. 8). </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> From a limited knowledge of species distributions, we predict that we
should never find elephants on any Pacific islands, even though they would
survive well there. Similarly, we predict that we should not find amphibians on
remote islands, or indigenous Cacti on Australia. Closely related species could
be distributed evenly worldwide, according to whichever habitat best suits
them. If this were the general biogeographical pattern, it would be a strong
blow to macroevolution (<a href="#BrownLomolino1998">Brown and Lomolino
1998</a>).<br /> </p>

<h2><a id="pred10" name="pred10"></a><a id="past_biogeography"
name="past_biogeography"></a>Prediction 2.6: Past biogeography</h2>

<p> Past biogeography, as recorded by the fossils that are found, must also
conform to the standard phylogenetic tree. </p>

<a id="pred10ex1" name="pred10ex1"></a><a id="past_biogeography_ex1"
name="past_biogeography_ex1"></a><h3><i>Example 1: marsupials</i></h3>

<p> As one example, we conclude that fossils of the hypothetical common
ancestors of South American marsupials and Australian marsupials should be
found dating from before these two landmasses separated. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> Consequently, we find the earliest marsupial fossils (e.g., Alphadon) from
the Late Cretaceous, when South America, Antarctica, and Australia were still
connected. Additionally, the earliest ancestors of modern marsupials are
actually found on North America. The obvious paleontological deduction is that
extinct marsupials fossil organisms should be found on South America and
Antarctica, since marsupials must have traversed these continents to reach
their present day location in Australia. Interestingly, we have found marsupial
fossils on both South America and on Antarctica. This is an astounding
macroevolutionary confirmation, given that no marsupials live on Antarctica now
(<a href="#WoodburneCase1996">Woodburne and Case 1996</a>). </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> We confidently predict that fossils of recently evolved animals like apes
and elephants should never be found on South America, Antarctica, or Australia
(excepting, of course, the apes that travel by boat). </p>

<a id="pred10ex2" name="pred10ex2"></a><a id="past_biogeography_ex2"
name="past_biogeography_ex2"></a><h3><i>Example 2: horses</i></h3>

<p> As a second example, very complete fossil records should be smoothly
connected geographically. Intermediates should be found close to their fossil
ancestors. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> The Equidae (i.e. horse) fossil record is very complete (though extremely
complex) and makes very good geographical sense, without any large spatial
jumps between intermediates. For instance, at least ten intermediate fossil
horse genera span the past 58 million years. Each fossil genus spans
approximately 5 million years, and each of these genera includes several
intermediate paleospecies (usually 5 or 6 in each genus) that link the
preceding and following fossil intermediates. They range from the earliest
genus, Hyracotherium, which somewhat resembled a dog, through Orohippus,
Epihippus, Mesohippus, Miohippus, Parahippus, Merychippus, Dinohippus, Equus,
to Modern Equus. Every single one of the fossil ancestors of the modern horse
are found on the North American continent (<a href="#MacFadden1992">MacFadden
1992</a>, pp. 99, 156-162). For more detail about the known evolution of the
Equidae, consult Kathleen Hunt's thorough FAQ on <a
href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/horses.html">Horse Evolution</a>. </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> It would be macroevolutionarily devastating if we found in South America an
irrefutable Epihippus or Merychippus (or any of the intermediates in-between)
from the Paleocene, Eocene, Oligocene, the Miocene, or anytime before the
Isthmus of Panama arose to connect North and South America (about 12 million
years ago). Moreover, we should never find fossil horse ancestors on Australia
or Antarctica from any geological era (<a href="#MacFadden1992">MacFadden
1992</a>; <a href="#BrownLomolino1998">Brown and Lomolino 1998</a>). </p>

<a id="pred10ex3" name="pred10ex3"></a><a id="past_biogeography_ex3"
name="past_biogeography_ex3"></a><h3><i>Example 3: apes and humans</i></h3>

<p> As our third example, consider the African apes. Humans are most closely
related to the great apes that are indigenous to Africa (as determined by
cladistic morphological analysis and confirmed by DNA sequence analysis). Why
did the <a
href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/lleakey.html">Leakeys</a>, <a
href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/rdart.html">Raymond Dart</a>, and <a
href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/rbroom.html">Robert Broom</a> go to
Africa in search of early hominid fossils? Why not dig in Australia, North
America, South America, Siberia, or Mesopotamia? Charles Darwin gave an answer
for this question over 130 years ago - long before any early hominid fossils
had been found. </p>

<blockquote>
<table class="grey" cellpadding="10"
summary="Charles Darwin predicts where human-ape intermediate fossils 
will be found based on present biogeography and common descent">
<tr>
<td>

<p> "We are naturally led to enquire, where was the birthplace of man at that
stage of descent when our progenitors diverged from the Catarrhine stock? The
fact that they belonged to this stock clearly shews that they inhabited the Old
World; but not Australia nor any oceanic island, as we may infer from the laws
of geographical distribution. In each great region of the world the living
mammals are closely related to the extinct species of the same region. It is
therefore probable that Africa was formerly inhabited by extinct apes closely
allied to the gorilla and chimpanzee; and as these two species are now man's
nearest allies, it is somewhat more probable that our early progenitors lived
on the African continent than elsewhere." (<a href="#Darwin1871">Darwin
1871</a>, p. 161) </p>

</td>
</tr>
</table>
</blockquote>

<p> <a id="Thus_etal1908" name="Thus_etal1908"></a>Thus, the theory of common
descent predicts that we may find early hominid fossils on the African
continent. </p>

<h3>Confirmation:</h3>

<p> Numerous transitional fossils between humans and the great apes have been
found in southern and eastern Africa. For examples, discussion, pictures,
detail, and extensive references refer to Jim Foley's comprehensive <a
href="http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/">Fossil Hominid's FAQ</a>. These
examples include such fossil species as <i>Ardipithecus ramidus,
Australopithecus anamensis, Australopithecus afarensis, Australopithecus garhi,
Kenyanthropus platyops, Kenyanthropus rudolfensis, Homo habilis</i>, and a host
of other transitionals thought to be less related to <i>Homo sapiens</i>, such
as the robust australopithicenes. At this point in time, the difficulty in
reconstructing exact genealogical relationships among all of these fossils
species is that there are too many links, not that there are missing links.
Like most family trees, the family tree of the hominids is best described as a
wildly branching bush. </p>

<h3>Potential Falsification:</h3>

<p> We do not expect to ever find any <i>Australopithicus, Ardipithecus, or
Kenyanthropus</i> fossils in Australia, North America, South America,
Antarctica, Siberia, or on any oceanic islands removed from Africa. Any such
findings would be catastrophically problematic for the theory of common
descent. </p>

</div>

<center>
<table cellpadding="10" summary="">
<tr align="center">
<td> <a href="section1.html"><img src="/pictures/arrow_l.gif" alt="" width="40"
height="40" border="0" /><br /> Previous</a> </td>
<td> <a href="/faqs/comdesc/"><img src="/pictures/arrow_u.gif" alt=""
width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br /> Contents</a> </td>
<td> <a href="section3.html"><img src="/pictures/arrow_r.gif" alt="" width="40"
height="40" border="0" /><br /> Next</a> </td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<div>
<br />
<a id="refs" name="refs"></a> 

<h2>References</h2>

<div class="minus1">
<p><a id="Abel1908" name="Abel1908"></a>Abel, O. (1908) "Die Morphologie der
Huftbeinrudimente der Cetaceen." Denkschr. Math. Naturw. Klasse Kaiserl. Aka.
Wiss. Vol. 81.</p>

<p><a id="Amasaki_etal1989" name="Amasaki_etal1989"></a>Amasaki, H., Ishikawa,
H., and Daigo, M. (1989) "Developmental changes of the fore- and hind-limbs in
the fetuses of the southern minke whale, Balaenoptera acutorostrata." Anat Anz
169: 145-148. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=2589636&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Andrews1921" name="Andrews1921"></a>Andrews, R. C. (1921) "A
remarkable case of external hind limbs in a humpback whale." Amer. Mus.
Novitates. No. 9.</p>

<p><a id="Belzberg_etal1991" name="Belzberg_etal1991"></a>Belzberg, A. J.,
Myles, S. T., and Trevenen, C. L. (1991) "The human tail and spinal
dysraphism." J Pediatr Surg 26: 1243-1245. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=1779337&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Berzin1972" name="Berzin1972"></a>Berzin, A. A. (1972) <b>The Sperm
Whale</b>. Pacific Scientific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography.
Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem. Available from the U. S.
Dept. of Commerce, National Technical Information Service. Springfield, VA.</p>

<p><a id="BesharseBrandon1976" name="BesharseBrandon1976"></a>Besharse, J. C.,
and Brandon, R. A. (1976) "Effects of continuous light and darkness on the eyes
of the troglobitic salamander Typhlotriton spelaeus." J Morphol149: 527-546. <a
href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=966284&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="BrownLomolino1998" name="BrownLomolino1998"></a>Brown, J. H., and
Lomolino, M. V. (1998) <b>Biogeography</b>. Second edition. Boston, MA:
Sunderland.</p>

<p><a id="Carroll1988" name="Carroll1988"></a>Carroll, R. L. (1988)
<b>Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution</b>. New York, W. H. Freeman and
Co.</p>

<p><a id="Carroll1997" name="Carroll1997"></a>Carroll, R. L. (1997) <b>Patterns
and Processes of Vertebrate Evolution</b>. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.</p>

<p><a id="Cohn2001" name="Cohn2001"></a>Cohn, M. J. (2001) "Developmental mechanisms of vertebrate limb evolution." Novartis Found Symp. 232: 47-57. <a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=11277086&amp;dopt=Abstract">[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="CohnTickle1999" name="CohnTickle1999"></a>Cohn, M. J., and Tickle, C. (1999) "Developmental basis of limblessness and axial patterning in snakes." Nature 399: 474-479. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=10365960&amp;dopt=Abstract">[PubMed]</a></p>


<p><a id="DaoNetsky1984" name="DaoNetsky1984"></a>Dao, A. H., and Netsky, M. G.
(1984) "Human tails and pseudotails." Human Pathology 15: 449-453. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=6373560&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Darwin1871" name="Darwin1871"></a>Darwin, C. (1871) <b>The Descent of
Man</b>. Amherst, New York, Prometheus Books.</p>

<p><a id="Dubrow_etal1988" name="Dubrow_etal1988"></a>Dubrow, T. J., Wackym, P.
A., and Lesavoy, M. A. (1988) "Detailing the human tail." Annals of Plastic
Surgery 20:340-344. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=3284435&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Durand_etal1993" name="Durand_etal1993"></a> Durand, J., Keller, N.,
Renard, G., Thorn, R., and Pouliquen, Y. (1993) "Residual cornea and the
degenerate eye of the cryptophthalmic Typhlotriton spelaeus." Cornea 12:
437-447. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=8306666&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<a id="FallonSimandl1978" name="FallonSimandl1978"></a>Fallon, J. F., and
Simandl, B. K. (1978) "Evidence of a role for cell death in the disappearance
of the embryonic human tail." Am J Anat 152: 111-129. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=677043&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> 

<p><a id="Fara1977" name="Fara1977"></a>Fara, M. (1977) "Coccygeal ('tail')
projection with cartilage content." Acta Chir. Plast. 19: 50-55. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=70138&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Freitag_etal1998" name="Freitag_etal1998"></a>Freitag, J., G. Ludwig,
et al. (1998) "Olfactory receptors in aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates."
Journal of Comparative Physiology 183: 635-650. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=9839455&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Futuyma1998" name="Futuyma1998"></a>Futuyma, D. (1998)
<b>Evolutionary Biology</b>. Third edition. Sunderland, Mass., Sinauer
Associates.</p>

<p><a id="GaliliSwanson1991" name="GaliliSwanson1991"></a>Galili, U., and
Swanson, K. (1991) "Gene sequences suggest inactivation of
alpha-1,3-galactosyltransferase in catarrhines after the divergence of apes
from monkeys." PNAS 88: 7401-7404. <a href=
"http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/16/7401">http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/88/16/7401</a></p>

<p><a id="Gilbert1997" name="Gilbert1997"></a>Gilbert, S. F. (1997)
<b>Developmental Biology</b>. Fifth edition. Sinauer Associates.</p>

<p><a id="Gish1983" name="Gish1983"></a>Gish, D. T. (1983) "Evolution and the
human tail." ICR Impact No. 117 <a href=
"http://www.icr.org/pubs/imp/imp-117.htm">http://www.icr.org/pubs/imp/imp-117.htm</a></p>

<p><a id="Gould1990" name="Gould1990"></a>Gould, S. J. (1990) "An earful of
jaw." Natural History 3: 12-23.</p>

<p><a id="Haag_etal1994" name="Haag_etal1994"></a>Haag, F., Koch-Nolte, F. et
al. (1994) "Premature stop codons inactivate the RT6 genes of the human and
chimpanzee species." Journal of Molecular Biology 243: 537-546. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=7966280&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Hall1984" name="Hall1984"></a>Hall, B. K. (1984) "Developmental
mechanisms underlying the formation of atavisms." Biol. Rev. 59: 89-124.</p>

<p><a id="Hall1995" name="Hall1995"></a>Hall, B. K. (1995) "Atavisms and
atavistic mutations." Nature Genetics 10: 126-127. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=7663504&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="Ham_etal1990" name="Ham_etal1990"></a>Ham, K., Sarfati, J. and
Wieland, C. (1990) <b>The Answers Book - Revised & Expanded</b>, Batten, D.
ed., Master Books. <a
href="http://www.answersingenesis.org/docs/446.asp">http://www.answersingenesis
.org/docs/446.asp</a> </p>

<p> <a id="Hattab_etal1995" name="Hattab_etal1995"></a>Hattab, F. N.,
Rawashdeh, M. A., and Fahmy, M. S. (1995) "Impaction status of third molars in
Jordanian students." Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 79:
24-29. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=7614155&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="Hill1974" name="Hill1974"></a>Hill, W. C. O. (1974) <b>Primates:
Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy. VII. Cyropithecinae: Cercocebus, Maccaca,
Cynopithecus.</b> New York: Halstead Press, John Wiley and Sons.</p>

<p><a id="Hooten1947" name="Hooten1947"></a>Hooten, E. A. (1947) <b>Up From the
Ape.</b> Second edition. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p><a id="Jeffery2001" name="Jeffery2001"></a>Jeffery, W. R. (2001) "Cavefish
as a model system in evolutionary developmental biology." Dev Biol. 231: 1-12.
<a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=11180948&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Kardong2002" name="Kardong2002"></a>Kardong, K. V. (2002)
<b>Vertebrates: Comparative Anatomy, Function, Evolution</b>. Third ed. New
York: McGraw Hill.</p>

<p><a id="KollarFisher1980" name="KollarFisher1980"></a>Kollar, E. J., and
Fisher, C. (1980) "Tooth induction in chick epithelium: expression of quiescent
genes for enamel synthesis." Science 207 :993-995. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=7352302&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Kos_etal2001" name="Kos_etal2001"></a>Kos, M., Bulog, B., Szel, A.,
and Rohlich, P. (2001) "Immunocytochemical demonstration of visual pigments in
the degenerate retinal and pineal photoreceptors of the blind cave salamander
(Proteus anguinus)." Cell Tissue Res 303: 15-25. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=11236001&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Ledley1982" name="Ledley1982"></a>Ledley, F. D. (1982) "Evolution and
the human tail." New Eng. J. Med. 306: 1212-1215. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=7070433&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Li1997" name="Li1997"></a>Li, W.-H. (1997) <b>Molecular
Evolution</b>. Sunderland, MA, Sinauer Associates.</p>

<p> <a id="Litonjua1996" name="Litonjua1996"></a>Litonjua, L. S. (1996)
"Pericoronitis, deep fascial space infections, and the impacted third molar." J
Philipp Dent Assoc. 47: 43-47. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9462056&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="LundbergParsons1962" name="LundbergParsons1962"></a>Lundberg, G. D.,
and Parsons, R. W. (1962) "A case of human tail." Am. J. Dis. Child 104:
72.</p>

<p><a id="MacFadden1992" name="MacFadden1992"></a>MacFadden, B. J. (1992)
<b>Fossil Horses: Systematics, Paleobiology, and Evolution of the Family
Equidae</b>. New York, Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p><a id="Matsuo_etal1993" name="Matsuo_etal1993"></a>Matsuo, T., Koga, H.,
Moriyama, T., Yamashita, H., Imazato, K., and Kondo, M. (1993) "[A case of true
human tail accompanied with spinal lipoma.]" No Shinkei Geka 21: 925-929. <a
href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=8413807&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Menton1994" name="Menton1994"></a>Menton, D. N. (1994) "The Human
Tail, and Other Tales of Evolution." St. Louis MetroVoice. Vol. 4, No. 1. <a
href="http://www.gennet.org/facts/metro07.html">http://www.gennet.org/facts/
metro07.html</a></p>

<p><a id="Mes_etal2002" name="Mes_etal2002"></a>Mes, T. H., Kuperus, P.,
Kirschner, J., Stepanek, J., Storchova, H., Oosterveld, P., and den Nijs, J. C.
(2002) "Detection of genetically divergent clone mates in apomictic
dandelions." Mol Ecol. 2002 11: 253-265. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=11856426&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Nemoto1963" name="Nemoto1963"></a>Nemoto, T. (1963) "New records of
sperm whales with protruded rudimentary hind limbs." Sci. Rep. Whales Res.
Inst. No. 17.</p>

<p><a id="Nishikimi_etal1994" name="Nishikimi_etal1994"></a>Nishikimi, M., R.
Fukuyama, et al. (1994) "Cloning and chromosomal mapping of the human
nonfunctional gene for L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase, the enzyme for
L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis missing in man." Journal of Biological Chemistry
269: 13685-13688. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=8175804&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Nishikimi_etal1992" name="Nishikimi_etal1992"></a>Nishikimi, M., T.
Kawai, et al. (1992) "Guinea pigs possess a highly mutated gene for
L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase, the key enzyme for L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis
missing in this species." Journal of Biological Chemistry 267: 21967-21972. <a
href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=1400507&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="Obiechina_etal2001" name="Obiechina_etal2001"></a>Obiechina, A. E.,
Arotiba, J. T., and Fasola, A. O. (2001) "Third molar impaction: evaluation of
the symptoms and pattern of impaction of mandibular third molar teeth in
Nigerians." Odontostomatol Trop. 24: 22-25. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11484653&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="Oetting_etal1993" name="Oetting_etal1993"></a>Oetting, W. S., O. C.
Stine, et al. (1993) "Evolution of the tyrosinase related gene (TYRL) in
primates." Pigment Cell Research 6: 171-177. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=8234203&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="OgawaKamiya1957" name="OgawaKamiya1957"></a>Ogawa, R., and Kamiya, T.
A. (1957) "Case of the cachalot with protruded rudimentary hind limbs." Sci.
Rep. Whales Res. Inst. No. 12.</p>

<p><a id="OhtaNishikimi1999" name="OhtaNishikimi1999"></a>Ohta, Y. and
Nishikimi, M. (1999) "Random nucleotide substitutions in primate nonfunctional
gene for L-gulano-gamma-lactone oxidiase, the missing enzyme in L-ascorbind
acid biosynthesis." Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1472: 408-411. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=10572964&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="Rakprasitkul2001" name="Rakprasitkul2001"></a>Rakprasitkul, S.
(2001) "Pathologic changes in the pericoronal tissues of unerupted third
molars." Quintessence Int. 32: 633-638. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11526892&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="Raynaud1990" name="Raynaud1990"></a>Raynaud, A. (1990) "Developmental
mechanism involved in the embryonic reduction of limbs in reptiles." Int J Dev
Biol 34:233-243. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=2203460&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="RaynaudKan1992" name="RaynaudKan1992">Raynaud, A., and Kan, P.
(1992</a>) "DNA synthesis decline involved in the developmental arrest of the
limb buds in the embryos of the slow worm, Anguis fragilis (L.)." Int J Dev
Biol 36:303-310. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=1525018&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="RaynaudVandenElzen1976" name="RaynaudVandenElzen1976"></a>Raynaud,
A., and Van den Elzen, P. (1976) ["Rudimentary stages of the extremities of
Scelotes gronovii (Daudin) embryos, a South African Scincidea reptile."] Arch
Anat Microsc Morphol Exp. 65: 17-36. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=1008558&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p> <a id="ReMine1982" name="ReMine1982"></a>ReMine, W. and J. M. K.
(anonymous) (1982) "Child recently born with a tail?" Bible Science Newsletter
20: 8. </p>

<p><a id="Rouquier_etal2000" name="Rouquier_etal2000"></a>Rouquier, S., A.
Blancher, et al. (2000) "The olfactory receptor gene repertoire in primates and
mouse: Evidence for reduction of the functional fraction in primates." PNAS 97:
2870-2874. <a href=
"http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/97/6/2870">http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/97/6/2870</a></p>

<p><a id="Sapunar_etal2001" name="Sapunar_etal2001"></a>Sapunar, D., Vilovic,
K., England, M., and Saraga-Babic, M. (2001) "Morphological diversity of dying
cells during regression of the human tail." Ann Anat 183: 217-222. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=11396790&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="Scadding1981" name="Scadding1981"></a>Scadding, S. R. (1981) "Do
'vestigial organs' provide evidence of evolution?" Evolutionary Theory 5:
173-176. </p>

<p> <a id="Schersten_etal1989" name="Schersten_etal1989"></a>Schersten, E.,
Lysell, L., and Rohlin, M. (1989) "Prevalence of impacted third molars in
dental students." Swed Dent J. 13: 7-13. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=2734701&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="Sedmera_etal1997" name="Sedmera_etal1997"></a>Sedmera, D., Misek, I.,
and Klima, M. (1997) "On the development of Cetacean extremities: I. Hind limb
rudimentation in the Spotted dolphin (Stenella attenuata)." Eur J Morphol 35:
25-30. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=9143876&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Sleptsov1939" name="Sleptsov1939"></a>Sleptsov, M. M. (1939) "On the
asymmetry of the skull of <i>Odontoceti.</i>" Zoologicheskii Zhurnal 18(3).</p>

<p><a id="Spiegelmann_etal1985" name="Spiegelmann_etal1985"></a>Spiegelmann,
R., Schinder, E. Mintz, M., and Blakstein., A. (1985) "The human tail: a benign
stigma." J. Neurosurgery 63:461-462. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=3894599&amp;dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p><a id="Standfast1992" name="Standfast1992"></a>Standfast, A. L. (1992) "The
human tail." New York State Journal of Medicine. 92: 116. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=1557201&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a></p>

<p> <a id="TevepaughDodson1995" name="TevepaughDodson1995"></a>Tevepaugh, D.
B., and Dodson, T. B. (1995) "Are mandibular third molars a risk factor for
angle fractures? A retrospective cohort study." J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 53:
646-649. <a href=
"http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=7776046&dopt=Abstract">
[PubMed]</a> </p>

<p><a id="Tyndale-BiscoeRenfree1987" name=
"Tyndale-BiscoeRenfree1987">Tyndale-Biscoe, H. and Renfree, M. (1987</a>)
<b>Reproductive Physiology of Marsupials</b>. Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p><a id="WoodburneCase1996" name="WoodburneCase1996"></a>Woodburne, M. O., and
Case, J. A. (1996) "Dispersal, vicariance, and the Late Cretaceous to Early
Tertiary land mammal biogeography from South America to Australia." Journal of
Mammalian Evolution 3: 121-161.</p>

<p><a id="ZembskiiBerzin1961" name="ZembskiiBerzin1961"></a>Zembskii, V. A.,
and Berzin, A. A. (1961) "On the rare phenomenon of atavism in the sperm
whale." Nauchnye Doklady Vysshei Shkoly. Series "Biologicheskie Nauki."</p> 
</div>
</div>

<p> <a href="refs.html">Full references</a> </p>

<p> <a href="glossary.html">Glossary</a> </p>

<center>
<table cellpadding="10" summary="">
<tr align="center">
<td> <a href="section1.html"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_l.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Previous</a> </td>
<td> <a href="/faqs/comdesc/"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_u.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Contents</a> </td>
<td> <a href="section3.html"><img
src="/pictures/arrow_r.gif" alt="" width="40" height="40" border="0" /><br />
Next</a> </td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<div>
<img src="http://counter.digits.com/wc/-h/comdesc" alt="" />
<img src="http://counter.digits.com/wc/-h/comdesc_section2" alt="" />
</div>
<!-- begin trailer -->
<p>
<map name="ltrailermap" id="ltrailermap">
<area shape="rect" coords="0,0,96,27" 
href="/" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="97,0,191,27" 
href="/origins/faqs.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="192,0,287,27"
href="/origins/search.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="288,0,383,27"
href="/origins/feedback.asp" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="384,0,481,27"
href="/origins/other-links.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,29,160,55"
href="/origins/faqs-qa.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,29,319,55"
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,29,480,55"
href="/origins/faqs-index.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,56,160,82"
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,56,319,82"
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,56,480,82"
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="0,83,160,109"
href="/origins/faqs-flood.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="161,83,319,109"
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html" alt="" />
<area shape="rect" coords="320,83,480,109"
href="/origins/faqs-debates.html" alt="" />
</map>
</p>

<center>
<br />
<p> 
 
 <img src="/pictures/ltrailer.gif" usemap="#ltrailermap" width="481"
 height="110" alt="" ismap="ismap"
 border="0" />
 </p>

<p>
<small><a href="/">Home Page</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs.html">Browse</a> | <a
href="/origins/search.html">Search</a> | <a
href="/origins/feedback.asp">Feedback</a> | <a
href="/origins/other-links.html">Links</a><br />
 <a href="/origins/faqs-qa.html">The FAQ</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-mustread.html">Must-Read Files</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-index.html">Index</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-creationists.html">Creationism</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-evolution.html">Evolution</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-youngearth.html">Age of the Earth</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-flood.html">Flood Geology</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-catastrophism.html">Catastrophism</a> | <a
href="/origins/faqs-debates.html">Debates</a></small>
</p>
</center>

<!-- end trailer -->

</body>
</html>


