ID=X0233
URL=http://www.wfdf.org/ulticomments.htm
SIZE=47687
DATE=12/07/2002
TIME=17:30:03
DATASET=Sport
HTML=<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>World Games Ultimate</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">

<p><font size="6"><strong>World Games Ultimate Game Commentaries </strong></font><font
size="4">(rev.8/22 02:30)</font></p>

<p><font size="5"><strong>August 19</strong> (Sun.)</font> </p>

<p>Preliminary Round Robin Games: (40 minutes x 2) + 10 minute
half time.<br>
<br>
<strong>08:00-09:40 </strong></p>

<p>&lt;JPN- 9 -<strong>USA</strong> -19&gt;</p>

<p>In contrast to your normal tournament in the United States,
these games are starting early - and on time. At eight o'clock,
&quot;Bullseye&quot; (aka Team USA) came out strong with a first
round win over Japan. The US was very successful using a variety
of zone defenses on the Japanese. Several long points were
converted into turnovers, resulting in goals for the US. Fortunat
Mueller and Damien Scott threw several goals for the US Team.
Heidi Pomfret was the main recipient, catching five scores. The
US long game was very strong with Steve Dugan, Christine Dunlap,
Mueller, and Scott having their way with long throws. </p>

<p>The Japanese were very successful moving the disc against
forehand and middle defense.Shortly after the Japanese shredded
the US &quot;middle&quot; marks, captain Bill Rodriguez remarked,
&quot;that's the last time we'll do that.&quot; In the second
half, the US worked exclusively with zone and forcing backhand.
The Japanese rarely tested the US deeps, as Justin Safdie and
Damien were successful keeping the throws to mostly mid and short
range passes. Pomfret continued her strong game with excellent
defense, playing the mark in many of the zone sets. With the
six-on-six format allows much wider swing throws on the field,
the US forced Japan to make many throws. Several of the turnovers
were created after Japan had thrown fifteen or more passes. The
US continually pulled away and Japan could never match the US
pace.</p>

<p>The team has a bye during the next round and will rest up for
a big game against Canada this afternoon.<br>
KB</p>

<p>&lt;GER- 14 <strong>CAN</strong>- 19&gt;</p>

<p>In contrast to the past few days the weather conditions this
morning were near perfect with moderate temperatures and perhaps
a little bit too much wind for a game in a stadium, where at
times gusts would make the disc pop up and down unpredictably.
Germany pulled and managed to get the disc back in their own
endzone and score the first point. From then both teams traded
points with Germany relying heavily on the typical
&quot;German-O&quot; and Canada earning several of its points
with long passes into the endzone. Canada finished the first half
leading 9 - 8 and in the second half they took advantage of an
increasing number of mistakes of the German team and set up a
lead of 4 points. Even when they also started to commit more
mistakes Germany did not use it and after 2 x 40 minutes Canada
won 19 - 14.<br>
TG</p>

<p><strong>10:40-12:20</strong></p>

<p>&lt; <strong>JPN</strong>- 18 SWE - 11&gt; </p>

<p>When they first saw the schedule, Japan thought that they had
a pretty rough draw having to start off with USA followed by
Sweden. With the turn of the weather it actually became an
advantage for Japan. In there second game against the Swedes, the
came out warm and ready to run. Japan jumped out to a quick lead
of 3 - 1 and though the Swedes came back to 4 - 3, they never
could close the gap. Several times the Swedes produced turnovers
and then threw long with the wind and out of the back of the
endzone. The half ended JPN 8 SWE 5. The confidence of the
Japanese grew in the second half and the Swedes never pulled out
of their morning funk.At the end it was JPN 18 SWE 11.<br>
DR</p>

<p>&lt;GER- 11 <strong>FIN</strong> -18&gt;</p>

<p>The temperature had risen considerably compared to their first
game when Germany pulled the disc. Finland dropped the disc on
their first pass but got it back and scored. In the third point
of the game Finland managed to pull away 3:1 with a long 70m
huck. Now Germany scored twice and tied it 3:3 with a spectacular
40m hammer throw from Robert Pesch to Rue Veitl. But Finland took
over control and reached a lead of 8:4. Germany fought back and
when they scored 8:6 there was only 50 sec left in the first
half. They decided to use the time and pulled the disc, risking
to fall back another point again, but Finland dropped the disc
and Germany finished the first half with 8:7. They received the
disc after the 10min half but could not score, 9:7 Finland. When
Germany scored two in a row for the 9:9 it looked as if the game
was open again. But from now on Germany committed many unforced
errors and could only score two more points until the time ran
out, and Finland won 18:11.<br>
TG</p>

<p><strong>13:30-15:10</strong></p>

<p>&lt;FIN-18 -SWE- 18&gt;</p>

<p>The highly anticipated Scandinavian match up was all that was
promised. Through the first half there was never a margin greater
than one goal and it ended in a 9 - 9 tie. In the second half,
Finland stretched to a 15 - 12 margin, but couldn't hold on as
Sweden ran off three straight goals to tie things up at 15. The
tied again at 16, 17 and, finally at 18. After the Finnish score
of 18 there were only 40 seconds remaining and the game ended in
a tie. The struggle will be continued in the next round.</p>

<p>DR</p>

<p>&lt;<strong>CAN</strong>- 16 USA -14&gt;</p>

<p>Team USA was coming off of a convincing win over Canada at
Potlach, but the Canadians seemed to have learned some things
from that loss. The first half was very even with neither team
able to open a sustainable lead. The half ended with Canada
edging ahead at 7-6. In the second half, they tied at 10, but at
that point Canada surged ahead with three straight goals. The US
was never able to bounce back from that hit and the game ended
with the Canadians putting there Potlatch disappointment to rest
16 - 14.<br>
</p>

<p><strong>16:20-18:00</strong></p>

<p>&lt;JPN 17-<strong>GER</strong> - 14&gt;</p>

<p>The two teams who had three games meet. Fatigue didn't seem to
be a major factor. They traded goals to 11-11 and then in a key
section of play, the Germans committed two turnovers and fell
behind by three. They never recovered and that was the final
margin </p>

<p><br>
<font size="5"><strong>August 20</strong> (Mon.)</font></p>

<p>Preliminary Round Robin Games: (40 minutes x 2) + 10 minute
half time.<br>
<br>
08:00-09:40 (Cool and fairly calm)</p>

<p>&lt;FIN-<strong> </strong>11<strong> - CAN -25</strong>&gt;</p>

<p>Canada jumped out early to a 6 - 1 lead and stretched their
advantage to 12 - 4 by halftime. Things got worse for the Finns
in the second half as they were outscored 2 to 1 and by game end
the were down by 14. This was the biggest offensive performance
and biggest margin of victory thus far in the round.</p>

<p>&lt;SWE-<strong> </strong>14<strong> -USA</strong> - 15&gt;</p>

<p>Eight o'clock is early to be playing Ultimate. Up at 6:00, eat
breakfast, and out to the field by 7:00. Perhaps the long, tough
game against Canada had taken more out of the US than we thought.
Sweden also looked to be more over their jet lag and had brought
their &quot;A game&quot; out for the early match.</p>

<p>Sweden took early advantage of uncharacteristic drops by Dom
and Fortch to take the first two goals (0-2). At this point, the
team seemed to loosen up a little bit as they scored on the next
three possessions, while Sweden scored on two. One of the goals
was a nice long huck from Fortunat to Steve Dugan @ 25:33.
(writer's note - with timed games I realized last night that I
can record the time that the goal is scored in the half ala
hockey and soccer) (3-4). On the next possession, the US looked
to tie it up. They pulled and set up a backhand mark on the
Swedish throwers. The US forced a throwaway after six passes.
With the disc at midfield Damien hit Justin Safdie in the endzone
to tie the game (4-4).</p>

<p>On the next pull the US set up a 1-2-3 zone, which Sweden
looked to handle with ease. Their thrower was about 25 yards
outside of the endzone looking to throw the score. He released
and put the disc into the air - it looked like a certain score.
Then, closing with incredible speed, Damien knocked the disc down
for the turnover. The US was unable to capitalize on the
possession as Steve Dugan overthrew Fortunat on a long throw. The
zone was reset and Scott pulled another one of his fabulous
defensive plays, intercepting the disc at midfield. The disc was
swung to Mueller who hit Heidi Pomfret making a beautiful layout
for the goal @ 19:10 (5-4). </p>

<p>The teams traded goals to 6-5 with Christine Dunlap hitting
Billy Rodriguez for the US score. At this point, it appeared that
the close game began to wear on both teams. The next point saw
Sweden have four turnovers and the US five. Steve Dugan made a
fabulous layout catch and was subsequently point blocked on his
huck attempt. Sweden then threw the disc away. Dugan was errant
again as his long throw did not connect. Dom missed Johanna on a
low throw that was called down. Mueller made another drop on a
throw by Dunlap. Sweden finally pulled it together and took
advantage of excellent field position to throw a short goal @
5:40 (6-6).</p>

<p>As time was winding down, Team USA looked like they just
wanted to end the half. Energy was low and they needed something
to fire them up. If they were looking, they certainly found it -
in DCS and Billy Rodriguez. Damien was everywhere on the next two
points. First, he skied over a Swedish receiver by a good eight
or ten inches, snatching the disc out of the air over his head.
He then proceeded to throw the ensuing goal to SafD, for 7-6 (@
3:30). On the final possession of the half, Sweden looked to put
it deep and test the US defense. The huck was deep, but Billy
closed on his man. Both went up to make a bid on the disc and
there was some inadvertent contact between the players' feet.
Initially the player called foul as he thought Rodriguez had
tripped him and limited his play on the disc. With some short
discussion, it was decided that the disc was flying too high and
the player would not have been able to catch the disc in bounds.
Turnover.</p>

<p>Taking the disc and working it against Sweden's forehand mark,
Damien threw a short pass to Tines for the final score of the
half, 8-6 (@ 0:40). </p>

<p>The other major note of the first half - Dom going out after
being landed on by a Swedish player after making a catch. She
went and saw the doctor and had her shoulder wrapped. She did not
return for the second half of the game and is going to see a
doctor this afternoon for x-rays. Also, Tines is playing with a
taped knee, possibly a burst bursar sac. She had it drained last
night and it is heavily taped for today. </p>

<p>Second half : nineteen possessions, seven goals. The women
were trying to conserve as much energy as possible, essentially
playing savage, with Tines coming in on offensive points. The
Swedes were giving the US the deep look, but the women were
unable to take advantage. Dom was watching from the sidelines,
with her shoulder in a sling.</p>

<p>Luckily the Swedes did not fare much better, as they had the
disc twenty times and only scored on eight of them. Jojo and
Heidi connected on the first goal of the half at 34:40 (9-7). At
this point the US had six straight turnovers and gave Sweden
three goals to take the lead (9-10). Most of the throws were
overthrows, long and wide. The goal trading began, and continued
- as Dana Green hit Heidi Pomfret to bring it back to a tie (@
22:39 (10-10)). Sweden went up 10-11, and Team USA came back to
tie with a throw from Steve to Fortunat (@ 17:17 (11-11)). Team
USA mixed up the defense on Sweden from forehand to backhand to
keep the Swedes off guard. The Swedish offense lives and dies by
the away cut up the line, and today their throws were right on
target. If the US defense was even a slight bit slack, the Swedes
would test it. The US began to shade their marks a little bit
more to straight up to stop the huck, but the Swedes kept
throwing. Tighter defense on the dump and the first cut began to
create some success and counts got high and some desperate throws
were made.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, until 12-12, the US was not able to take much
advantage of the miscues. At 12-12, Justin Safdie came up with a
big D in the endzone on a huck. The US finally got their short
game going on the Swedes hard forehand mark, breaking it several
times and flowing the disc into the endzone, with a throw from
Dugan to Rodriguez (@ 9:30 13-12). With the next point, the US
needed a D stop and they got it. On a miscommunication in the
Swedes' offense, Damien was in the right place at the right time
and intercepted the pass. He finished off the point with a throw
to Dugan, who made a sweet skying catch for the score (@ 6:45
(14-12)).</p>

<p>The long game was taking its toll. Both teams turned the disc
over on their next possessions, with a long throwaway by Sweden
and Jojo missing Dana Green on a wide throw. However, the US had
their eyes on the clock and just hoped that they could hang on.
Sweden took the next point at 3:40, to bring the game within a
point (14-13). The US received the disc and calmly began to work
it. As they got closer to the endzone, Steve Dugan did not have
the option he wanted and calmly called a timeout at 1:56. We
weren't sure what happened, whether the play was called, or it
was a broken play, but as the stall count got high, Dugan was
forced to put up a blady forehand into the endzone. A crowd of
people was there, with the tall Swedish defender looking to have
the angle. SafD was not going to let this happen as he set
himself, extended and went up high to snatch the disc from
between the defender's hands (@ 1:45 (15-13)). With the timed
game, it looked like Sweden would only get one more chance at the
endzone, and this was indeed the case. The US pulled to the
Swedes who worked the disc underneath for four passes and then
sent it deep. They connected on the score, but there were only
fifteen seconds left in the game. Game over, USA 15, Sweden 14.</p>

<p>The team is back to the training center for lunch and to rest
for the next few hours. They have Germany and Finland this
afternoon. Neither of these games will be easy, especially if the
team is low on women.</p>

<p>KB</p>

<p>10:40-12:20 </p>

<p>&lt;GER- 16<strong> SWE - 22</strong>&gt;</p>

<p>The German television crew turned up, hoping for a win, but it
was not to be. The Swedes were also hungry for a win as they
needed to compensate for two losses (vs. Japan and USA) and a
draw against Finland. Germany pulled and after an errant throw of
Sweden managed to score the first point of the game. The Germans
scored another one before the Swedes finally got in the game. As
in all German games here so far teams started trading points. But
as in past games, also, Germany could not gain an advantage when
Sweden would lose the disc and instead the Swedes managed to pull
away slowly. In the second half this tendency even increased and
the added effect of many bad throws and drops of the Germans made
Sweden win by a high margin. Notable is a &quot;Greatest&quot; by
the German Mohamed Boujataoui about 20m in front of the Swedish
endzone which was caught by Esther Braun and eventually led to a
score. Unfortunately it was called back as it was unclear if
Mohamed had been out.</p>

<p>&lt;<strong>JPN</strong> -19 FIN - 11&gt;</p>

<p>It used to be that the Japan team gave up a good bit of size
on most other international teams. The arrival of Masato Okado
has fixed that. At 186 cm and 83kg he can hold his own in the
endzone with anyone. He's also a good leaper and very agile.
Combining Masato with their usual speedy handlers, Japan has
become a force to be reckoned with. Everyone now sees that their
first match loss was not a good measure of the squad. The Finns
found out that Japan was for real as the were steadily outscored
almost two- to- one right from the start. The game ended with
Japan up 19 - 11.<br>
<br>
13:30-15:10 (Temperature has risen to the high 80's)</p>

<p>&lt;JPN-<strong> </strong>13<strong> - CAN</strong> -16&gt;</p>

<p>This was a big match up with everyone wondering if Japan could
actually put a gold medal in its future by spoiling the
Canadian's string of wins. An enthusiastic crowd was hoping to
see the upset. As luck had it, the president of the AOC, and the
president of the IWGA and several important IOC board members
were on hand to watch. They were very interested in the
competition and in particular were impressed with the balance of
the mixed squads and the self officiating. In particular, it
seemed that Japan found it hard to find a match up for Leslie
Calder. Her mix of size, speed and disc handling caused
continuing problems for the Japanese. At the half Canada had
built a 4-point gap and Japan could only cut that by one by
game's end.</p>

<p>&lt; GER-<strong> </strong>11 -<strong> USA</strong> -20&gt;<br>
The after lunch skinny was &quot;preserve and endure&quot;. Dom
was out with a secondary separation of her right shoulder
(throwing hand) and Tines' knee looks like it swallowed a
korfball. The women were going nearly savage after the break and
we all knew it. Jojo took a long nap at lunch and Heidi and
Greena made sure to get as much fluid and food in them as
possible.</p>

<p>Team USA knew that the Germans were not as strong as their
team and were not worried, even with the decrease in fire power.
Fortunat and Dugan stepped up to take control of the throwing
game and everyone else contributed just enough. The game started
out with eight goals on the first ten possessions, to open a four
point lead (8-4). The defense varied between zone and man, with a
lot of forcing middle to shut down the wide open 3-1-3 German
offense. After this, the teams nearly matched each other on both
points and turnovers. The remainder of the half was back and
forth, with Team USA trying to play as conservatively as possible
and the German team not able to take much advantage of the
mistakes. Halftime score 10-7.</p>

<p>The second half was more of the same, with a little bit of
excitement here and there. The Germans looked to get fired up
with a point block on Billy Rodriguez on defense, but Damien
Scott and Justin Safdie managed to keep the long throws honest,
while the Germans looked to score. At this point, Tines and Dom
were done and Heidi, Dana, and Jojo were in for the duration. The
USA men were telling the women not to cut, just &quot;stand
still&quot; and conserve energy. Heidi was running herself
ragged, playing point in the 1-3-2 zone and making cuts all over
the field. The Germans never played zone defense on the US and
left them free to run. The US did their best to take advantage of
the clock with a man dump set, using as many swing passes as
possible and only looking up field when necessary and the cut was
wide open. </p>

<p>Fourteen possessions and ten goals in the second half was
pretty telling. Germany never got closer than three (7-10 and
10-13) and were hurt by unforced errors, mostly throwaways and D
blocks by Heidi and Jojo. At 14-10, the US pulled away, with
Damien and SafD catching six of the last seven goals, to end at
20-11.</p>

<p>KB</p>

<p>16:20-18:00 (Somewhat cooler with low sun being a bit of a
factor.)</p>

<p>&lt;SWE- 14-<strong>CAN</strong>- 20&gt; </p>

<p>Both teams looked pretty tired at the start, having played two
earlier matches each. The shade of the stadium made this match
more pleasant than FIN-USA which was in full sun. Leslie Calder
continued to be a major factor as she continually burned the
Swedes both deep and on uncovered cuts. Turnovers really hurt the
Swedes as they seemed to have a breakdown each time they were
getting on a roll.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&lt;FIN- 13 <strong>USA</strong>- 15-&gt;<br>
Looking to tomorrow, the US had nothing to gain with this game
and nothing to lose (they were guaranteed second - even with a
loss - due to their head-to-head victory over Japan), except
another player. Damien's hamstring had started acting up in the
previous game and he decided to sit this one out. Team USA could
ill afford to lose another player during this long day. Sports
fans, here's your game lineup : we've got six on six Ultimate and
you can bring seven players, that's right, you get one sub. Chose
your person carefully... Toeing the line were: Fortch, Dugan,
SafD, Billy, Dana, Heidi, and Jojo. Tines, Dom, and Damien were
on the sideline for critical water refills and moral support.</p>

<p>The game strategy was going to be more of the same, with an
interesting twist - the outcome of the game would determine if
Finland would make the semifinals, or not. Yesterday, Finland and
Sweden had played to an 18-18 tie. They had both lost to Japan
and beaten Germany. Sweden now had Canada and Finland the
Americans. If Finland won their game and Sweden lost, they took
the #4 spot. If they lost, even if Sweden lost they would miss
the semis due to point differential. But, there's a twist - what
would happen if there was a tie? Yes, indeed, as we are in the
preliminaries, games could in fact end with a tie. Hold on to
your seats for the outcome.</p>

<p>In the first half it was easy to see that Bullseye was having
a hard time getting up for the game. How could you blame them?
Their three women had just played thirty-one points, essentially
without subbing. The strategy was the same, and the execution not
quite as precise. There was a small difference though. Finland
was doing a much better job of matching the US scoring than
Germany. The Americans immediately started the game in the hole,
getting behind 0-1 and then 1-2. At that point, it looked like
Billy put on his &quot;O&quot; shoes as he began to make himself
a more integral part of the offense and take some pressure of
Fortch, Steve, and SafD. An early goal to Jojo, a second one to
Fortch at 20:45 (5-3) and a stall at midfield had him jamming.
His energy helped keep the team up and pull through the difficult
first half. Steve Dugan had a rough spot in the first half, but
closed it nicely as he caught a sweet hammer from Fortch (8-5 @
2:50) near the end of the half. Halftime score was 8-6, USA.</p>

<p>The second half was a little bit messy as the fatigue started
to show. Finland closed to within one (10-9) and traded the next
goal with the US (11-10 @ 22:45). And just as the team might be
letting the game slip away, the &quot;Little Engine that
Could&quot; put on her most determined game face and single
handedly pushed the US train forward. Heidi got two great layout
blocks, one right in front of Finland's goal to push the momentum
in the USA's direction. A nice forehand throw from Greena to SafD
gave the US the two point cushion, 13-11 (@ 15:55). </p>

<p>Sixteen minutes is a long time to burn the clock and Team USA
was going to do their best to do it. Zero yardage offense became
the norm with the fifteen or twenty yard strike, when needed.
Zone defense kept the Finns throwing a lot of passes. Though they
often moved the disc up the field, they were usually forced to
throw dump passes of about 15 yards. Swing wide and push them
back. With the three women in the cup, the 3-2-1 defense was all
about how long they could hold their legs. At 9:25 Finland
finally broke the zone and again pulled to within a point
(13-12). Team USA then worked the disc underneath for about ten
throws and then saw a long chuck from SafD to Billy for the score
at 6:50 (14-12). </p>

<p>The team could see the win within their reach, but still had
over six minutes to play. They continued to work the time between
points to its maximum (75 seconds) and Dugan did his best James
Studarus &quot;slow walk&quot; to pick up the disc. One more
point of zone defense resulted in a goal for Finland (14-13), but
only five minutes left. The US decided that the Finns had become
to accustomed to the US zone and switched the defense to forcing
middle/straight up. </p>

<p>As the point was unfolding, it was now known that the Finns
controlled their destiny. Sweden had lost to Canada. If Finland
could tie, they would make the semis and knock out the Swedes.
Finland received the disc and threw sixteen passes before having
a low throw and critical drop. Team USA could not capitalize as
Fortch was forced into a high count and had to punt the disc.
SafD was unable to make the catch and the Finns had the disc
back, for a second chance to tie. Right away they tried to push
the pace, but there was nothing left in the gas tank. An easy
cross field swing turned into a miscommunication and Finland was
not going to the endzone. Good field position and one throw from
Fortch to SafD at 0:30 was the end of the story and gave the US
the two point win.</p>

<p>KB<br>
</p>

<p><font size="5"><strong>August</strong> 21(Tue)</font><br>
</p>

<p><strong>Semifinals </strong></p>

<p><br>
<strong>09:30-11:30 </strong></p>

<p>&lt; <strong>CAN</strong> - 18 SWE -10&gt; </p>

<p>The stadium set up is an unusual arrangement in which the
stands are back to back with press box on top like an airport
flight control center. The semi final matches started at 9:30 on
both fields. Most of the crowd was here to cheer on Japan against
USA. On the other field, a smaller crowd gathered to see the 1 -
4 match up between Sweden and Canada. Sweden had to be feeling
fortunate to be in the match, having won a third-level tiebreaker
against Finland to advance and keep their medal hopes alive.
Canada didn't waste much time making it clear that the didn't
intend to be playing in the match for the bronze.A big difference
between the teams is the fact that Canada has had a good bit more
time together as a squad and has been able to play a good many
very competitive matches. In contrast, the Swedes show that they
really haven't had nearly as much game time together. This
difference became more and more clear in the second half as the
Swedes would periodically have turnovers or defensive breakdowns
from miscommunication. The Canadians finished out their
undefeated string and moved into the finals 18 - 10</p>

<p><strong>USA</strong> -15 JPN -12&gt;</p>

<p>Team USA went to bed at eight o'clock last night. Everyone was
exhausted. Off campus dinner plans were cancelled and everyone
tried to get as much sleep as possible. It was hot and sunny
yesterday and the players used up all their energy during the
three long games. In the team meeting strategy was discussed. Dom
and Tines would play as many points as they could handle, in
order to rest the other three women.</p>

<p>The first half was all &quot;ball control&quot; offense as the
three men on the field controlled the game and continued to try
and let the women rest. The US did a good job of controlling the
disc with nine first half points on twelve possessions. Steve
Dugan took the majority of the goal shots, notching up five
throws for scores. Damien and SafD split the other three, with
Damien throwing one goal and SafD the other two. Fortch shifted
gears and caught four of the scores.</p>

<p>The first half defense was a mix of person and zone, with
forcing forehand and both the 3-2-1 and 1-3-2 zones. Heidi
Pomfret continued running the point for the US and the &quot;all
women&quot; cup did a good job working the Japanese throwers.
Dana Green made a great adjustment at the middle-middle spot,
closing down the crash cut several times. At least four of
Japan's possessions were more than ten passes, where they would
work the disc close to the goal line and have some sort of
miscommunication and an unforced error. Halftime score 9-6, USA.</p>

<p>In the second half, the wind picked up to a more noticeable
ten miles per hour, which began to affect the throws. Neither
team converted on their first possession of the half, with Damien
overthrowing Tines. After the turnovers, the &quot;Fortch and
SafD Show&quot; started. The next two goals were Fortch throwing
to Justin (@ 37:30) with a long forehand and (@34:00) with a
break the mark high release backhand. Japan was not going to let
the game out of hand and matched the US on both goal counts
(11-8). After this score, the &quot;point from hell&quot; began.
Six turnovers for Team USA and six for Japan. SafD missed Dugan
out the back of the endzone, Fortch had a throwaway, Dana a drop
on a low throw, a drop by Jojo, a Japanese defender laying out on
a throw to Jojo and SafD overthrowing Jojo. Fatigue was
definitely in the legs and mind of the US. Luckily for Bullseye,
Japan was completely unable to capitalize on the mistakes.
Several throwaways, an interception in the endzone by Fortch and
a SICK layout D by Tines kept Japan out of the endzone. Finally,
at 21:15, the reliable combo came through - Fortch hit SafD with
a backhand into the endzone for the US to go up by four (12-8).</p>

<p>The teams traded the next three goals to go to 13-10 USA
(Damien to SafD @ 16:25). On the ensuing point, a great high D
block on the receiver by Dugan gave the disc back to the USA.
Fortch picked up the disc and looked upfield. He didn't see what
he wanted and flipped the disc over to Dugan. Dugan flipped it
right back to Fortch. Fortch looked around and didn't see
anything he wanted. There were no options. Just as we heard
&quot;stalling nine&quot; we could see SafD bolting from the back
of the stack. A not-so-pretty inside-out forehand into the
endzone was hauled down by SafD for the score (@ 11:15 14-10).
With this throw, Team USA's confidence was boosted. Even though
there was over ten minutes remaining in the game, the team felt
that they had the game under control. They would attempt to slow
down the pace for the remainder of the game and rest the women as
much as possible. Dom came in for a few D points to give Heidi a
rest and Tines even came back out of the locker room for a one
point appearance (she had taken an injury sub on the layout block
and had her knee reexamined by the trainers).</p>

<p>Japan scored at 6:35, but Team USA was content to have given
up only one goal during a four and a half minute span. The
defense for the last five minutes of the game was a very
aggressive forehand mark, trying to stop Japan's inside-out
forehand. There were several fouls on the mark, but nothing
excessive. The calls were an advantage to the US as every
stoppage of play took about 20 seconds off the clock. A tough
last five minutes saw another five turnovers from the team.
Fortch was point blocked on the goalline after hauling in a great
huck, Billy's defender got him on a run through D and Fortch
missed Heidi on a long throw. Finally the hell was ended when the
Japanese dropped a low throw right in front of their goalline.
Billy picked up the disc and quickly flipped it to Forch for the
score (15-11 @1:30). One and a half minutes left, the US had the
game in the bag. They pulled for the last point of the game. The
defense was pretty loose, but Japan made an unwise choice close
to the endzone. SafD knocked the disc down for the turnover. Team
USA got the disc back, but SafD and Damien miscommunicated on a
throw to give the disc back to Japan. Four quick throws and Japan
took the last goal of the game. Final score, USA 15 Japan 12.</p>

<p>The team is headed back to the training center for rest and
lunch. They will be facing Canada in the finals at 3:30.</p>

<p>KB</p>

<p><strong>Fifth Place Match</strong></p>

<p><strong>11:30-13:30 </strong></p>

<p>&lt; <strong>FIN</strong>- 19 GER - 13&gt;<br>
</p>

<p>Germany knew that the game with Finland would be their last
chance to put a win on their World Games scorecard. However, in
the prelim match up, Finland had handled the German side pretty
easily 18 - 11. The Finns certainly didn't want to change that
arrangement and they jumped off to a two - nothing lead. Then the
Germans too advantage of three straight Finnish errors to go up 6
- 2. It looked like things might be turning around, but by the
end of the half the Finns again led 9 - 7. After halftime the
Finns put down the hammer and ran off four straight points to
lead 13 to 7. After that, the teams traded goals to finish up at
19 - 13, giving the Finns 5th position.</p>

<p>13:30-15:30 </p>

<p><strong>Bronze Medal Match</strong><br>
&lt;<strong>JPN</strong> - 19 SWE - 13&gt;</p>

<p>The Japan/ Sweden match in the prelims was the breakthrough
for Japan as it was their first win after thei opening loss to
the US. Japan had surprised the Swedes with an 18 to 11 win.
Japan led 10 - 6 at halftime. The smooth-running Japanese offense
steadily stretched the lead through the second half, clinching
the bronze at 19 - 13.<br>
</p>

<p>The Japanese teamhad set its sights on a gold medal in Akite,
but the bronze ended up looking very good to them after matching
up with the US and Canadian teams. The did say that they are now
very committed to a strong showing at the next WFDF Ultimate
championship in Hawaii. The great publicity for thie event in
Japan should help draw many new Japanese athletes to ultimate.
Prior to the World Games competition there was no mixed play in
Japan. All the Japanese team greatly enjoyed the experience and
hope for more mixed play in the future.</p>

<p>15:30-17:30 </p>

<p><strong>Gold Medal Final</strong><br>
(45 minutes x 2) + 10 minute half time (and tiebreaker)</p>

<p>&lt;<strong>CAN</strong> - 18* SWE - 17&gt;<br>
* Won tiebreak with an unanswered goal in the second round.</p>

<p>Wow. This was one of the most exciting games of Ultimate,
ever. Going into the game, everyone thought the Canadians had a
big advantage - or at least the Team USA groupies who had been
tallying the number of trips that had been made to the hospital.
With the injuries to Tines and Dom, the Canadian women would be
looking to take advantage. Or, at least that's what you would
expect.</p>

<p>The finals were going to be forty-five minute halves, five
minutes longer than the preliminary games. The extra time would
be a factor in the US strategy. Calm and loose going into the
game, the team would leave everything on the field. </p>

<p>The US started right off working the disc. They pushed upfield
against the Canadian's tough forehand marks. The first goal was
scored on a throw from Steve Dugan to Fortunat in the front of
the endzone at 43:05. </p>

<p>The Canadians received the disc for their first posession and
began to move downfield. Tough marks by the US defense forced
difficult throws, and Su Ning Strube put a disc a little bit high
for the first turnover. The US got the disc back, but was unable
to capitalize as Billy threw the disc away. Two more turnovers
ensued, with Su Ning having to make another tough throw and
putting it too low. Heidi Pomfret did not get the cut she needed
and she was forced to punt the disc away. With good field
position, the Canadians took the disc back and scored with a
quick two passes, the throw coming from Jeff Cruickshank to Kirk
Savage (@ 39:30 1-1).</p>

<p>The teams would begin to trade points, with the next US goal
being scored on a long throw from Jojo to Justin SafD which went
over the head of Cruickshank (@37:20 2-1). Canada answered right
off the pull, working the disc upfield into the redzone. Savage
got the disc and hit Allan Nicols with a short strike into the
endzone (@ 34:50 2-2). We hit 3-3 with eleven passes culminating
in a Dugan to SafD goal (@33:10) and five passes for the
Canadians and VY Chow hitting Mike Grant (@ 31:15) over Damien
Scott.</p>

<p>Here, both teams had two straight turnovers before the US
would score. SafD missed Dugan long out the back of the endzone
and Dugan also had a drop right in front of the endzone. VY Chow
had a drop on a swing pass that was low and Jill Calkin also had
a dropped disc near the American's endzone. On the fifth
posession of the point Fortunat took advantage of the good field
positon and hit Dugan with a sweet breakmark forehand for the
lead (@ 26:50 4-3). </p>

<p>On the next point, the Canadians tried to push using their
women and were successful. Mike Grant hit Anja Haman for the
short score at 25:30 to retie the score at 4-4. On the next pull
Tines was on the line for offense, trying to give the American
women a break. She took the second pass off the pull and looked
deep. Unfortunately, she overthrew Damien long and out of bounds.
The Canadians gave it right back as Su Ning missed Leslie Calder
with a throwaway high. The US got good field position off the
turnover and with four throws, Damien hit Steve Dugan for the
score (@ 23:00 5-4).</p>

<p>More of the same, with athletic moves, but some
miscommunication on each team. Savage missed Cruickshank with a
long throw, Dugan missed Safdie with an errant upwind flick.
Cruickshank swung the disc to Anja, but she was unable to hold on
to it. The US took the next one to push the margin to two points
when Dugan hit Jojo with an nice upwind throw (@19:50). Savage
answered, finishing the point after Leslie Calder made a great
high grab over Jojo at midfield. Grant caught the score and we
were back to a one point game (6-5 @ 17:30). Canada would tie the
score on the next point as Dugan was forced to punt the disc on a
high stall count. Ten passes and a timeout later saw VY hitting
Nicols to notch it at six all (@ 14:50).</p>

<p>Another tie as Damien hit Billy in the endzone as Mark Ceralia
misread the disc and it zoomed in over his head. The US tested
Canada with their 1-3-2 defense, but solid throws worked the disc
very successfully. Savage hit Jill Calkin with a scoober over
Damien at the back of the endzone to go to 7-7 (@ 10:40) On the
next point, Heidi decided it was time to get into the scoring
column as she pulled in a high release backhand from Dugan that
floated nicely down the line. The US was not convinced that the
zone wasn't working so they tried it again on the next point.
Looking to throw before she had the disc in her hands resulted in
a drop from VY. The US offense stalled when they got the disc
back and Damien threw away the disc on an errant forehand. With a
quick pick up of the disc Allan Nicols sent the disc into the
endzone for Mike Grant and the result was a stellar layout catch
for the score (8-8 @ 5:15)</p>

<p>One more score for each team in the half. The US score was
somewhat bizarre as Steve Dugan sent the disc into the endzone
for Fortch. It looked as if Mark Ceralia (#13) might get the
disc, but he tipped it, Fortch bobbled it and then came up with
the catch. On his knees in the endzone, Fortch just smiled and
tossed the disc in Ceralia's direction. His response was to spike
it and stomp off the field in disgust. Canada looked to bounce
back with a huck from Grant to Cruickshank, but he missed out the
side of the endzone. The long point was wearing on the US and
they would not be able to keep the advantage going into the half.
Damien looked to hit Safdie long, but sent it too far. Grant got
the disc and hit Leslie Calder with a backhand down the line to
end the half tied at nine (@ 0:40)</p>

<p>At halftime, the US team had to be pretty happy. The pace of
the game was to their liking. The breeze was not too strong
(typhoon on the way) and the sun was not a factor. Their three
main women were playing well and the team was hanging right in
there. The Canadians were making enough mistakes to let the US
capitalize and the offense was reasonably successful. The team
would be looking to take the same approach to the second half,
but the big question remained - could the US women still hang
with Canada during the second half? Calder was playing strong and
the other four women were also making plays when needed.</p>

<p>The first posession of the second half saw Haman working hard
on Pomfret's mark, but throwing the disc away wide. A throwaway
by Fortch right off the pick up gave the disc right back to
Canada. Grant hit Calder with her first goal of the second half
breaking the US mark down the line (@ 43:45 9-10). The US
received the pull and again Mueller threw the disc away. He was
becoming frustrated and the Canadians sensed their chance to pull
away. Another tough mark by Pomfret forced Haman to throw a
second disc wide. The Damien/Mike Grant rivalry began to heat up
as Grant point blocked Damien on the next US posession. Fired up
Damien got a sky D block in the endzone on the next Canadian
chance. Moving the disc up the field, Dana Green was forced into
a touch through and threw the disc away. Happy to return the
favor, VY also threw away the disc after four passes by Canada.
Finally the point was going to end. Mueller wanted to make up for
his tough stretch and put a nice long forehand to Jojo for the
goal (@ 37:30 10-10). A short pass from Calder to Su Ning gave
Team Canada their one point edge back at 36:00 (10-11).</p>

<p>The US received going down wind on the next point and the
breeze had picked up. Dugan looked to send the disc long as
Damien had the advantage. The disc sailed long out the back of
the endzone and there would be no score. Canada took the disc
back and immediately looked for Calder. By this point, Jojo had
settled in and was playing stronger defense on the Canadian star.
A long throw went high and the two women went up for the disc.
Nine times out of ten Calder pulls these discs down with ease.
Not this time. Jojo hung in and ripped the disc right out of the
sky. She closed the point out when Dugan sent the disc to her in
the endzone and the score was yanked right out of Calder's hands
(@ 33:00 11-11).</p>

<p>The US would go up a goal as the Canadians turned the disc
over swinging it against the zone. Fortch hit Dugan with a nice
upwind forehand at 31:00 (12-11). Grant answered for Canada,
hitting Ceralia over Dana Green in the zone at 28:50 (12-12).
This would be the first of five straight goals for the Canadians,
without a turnover. During this stretch, the US was only able to
muster two as their offense hit a rut. Grant threw three of the
goals, hitting Ceralia and Calder. Cruickshank and Nicols didn't
want to be left as they both hit for scores. At 14-16, the
Canadians looked to be pulling away. Billy miscommunicated on a
throw to Jojo and VY hit Leslie Calder for the three point margin
(@ 8:45 14-17).</p>

<p>At this point the fans became concerned as there was not that
much time to mount a comeback. What happened in the next eight
minutes was phenominal. Fortch stepped up to control the end of
the game, throwing all three goals. Two of them were the patented
combination of Mueller to Safdie (@ 7:15 a nice forehand down the
line and @ 1:04 to tie). Excellent defense by Damien on Mike
Grant forced two drops at the end of regulation that definitely
affected the outcome of the game.</p>

<p>At 16-17, with four minutes left, the question remained, could
the US score? A drop by Grant gave the disc to the US, but Fortch
threw the disc away on a forehand huck. The Canadians looked to
move the disc, but on the first throw Grant dropped the disc.
With excellent field posession and three throws, Fortch hit SafD
in the endzone to tie the game at the end of regulation! The
first World Games medal match was tied. With the tie, the gamed
moved to the tiebreak method listed below.</p>

<p>The tiebreak procedure for the World Games semi and final
matches was as follows:</p>

<p><font color="#000000">(1) The captains use the disc flip to
determine choice of first possession.</font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">(2) The team getting the first
possession starts play at the brick position, attacking the far
goal. They may choose either end of the field to begin. They play
until they score or there is a turnover.</font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">(3) The possession is then given to the
other team and they also begin play from the brick mark on the
field end of their choice attacking the far goal. They also play
until they score or there is a turnover. This completes round
one. If only one of the teams has scored, they are declared the
winner. If both or neither of the teams have scored, they move to
round two.</font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">(4) In round two, the same procedure is
followed, except, the team who played first in round one now
plays second and each team must now play in the opposite field
direction from what they had chosen in the first round. Again, at
the end of this round if only one of the teams has scored, they
are declared the winner. If both or neither of the teams have
scored, they move on to round three. These rounds continue until
the tie is resolved.</font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">(5) All usual rules of play apply during
these rounds except that there are no time-outs and unlimited
substitutions may be made prior to each possession. Also, if the
game has been played with two types of official disc, each team
may choose the disc that they wish to use for its possessions.</font></p>

<p>Team Canada took the disc first and looked downwind. They
appeared to be moving the disc, but after four throws, an errant
pass or misread hit Calder in the face and she dropped the disc.
The US got the disc and the chance to score for the win. Two
throws and there was nothing there. The choices that had saved
the US at the end of the second half let them down as Fortch
threw the disc away.</p>

<p>On the second set of posessions, the US would get the disc
first and work it upwind. A sweet layout bid by Dana Green with
Calder on her was called a foul and it was contested. The disc
was sent back to the thrower. On a miscommunication for the dump,
Dugan dropped the disc. Turnover US!</p>

<p>Disc back to Canada for the chance to win. The US set up a
back hand mark, but looked tentative. A miscue on the defense
between two US defenders allowed Kirk Savage to slip into the
endzone. Cruickshank spotted him and sent the disc high. Savage
cruised across the back of the endzone and hauled the disc in
easily for the score.</p>

<p>Game over! Canada 18 Team USA 17.</p>

<p>Kudos to both teams for an excellent game and a great
tournament. The audience could not have asked for a better game.</p>

<p>_________________</p>

<p>Very special thanks to Kate Bergeron of UPA and Thomas
Griesbaum of Germany for their great assistance on the
commentaries. I wrte the bad ones.</p>

<p>Stork</p>

<p>Image collection is up at: <a
href="http://www.ofoto.com/I.jsp?m=14889269103&amp;n=11972601">http://www.ofoto.com/I.jsp?m=14889269103&amp;n=11972601</a><br>
<br>
Ofoto requires membership sign up, but is free and very useful.</p>
</body>
</html>

