ID=X0527
URL=http://www.wfdf.org/2002WUCCapp.htm
SIZE=24232
DATE=12/07/2002
TIME=17:35:02
DATASET=Sport
HTML=<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>WFDF World Ultimate Club Championships </title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">

<p><font size="5"><b>WFDF World Ultimate Club Championships -
Honolulu, Hawaii 2002.</b></font> </p>

<p>To: All National Flying Disc Associations. </p>

<p>From: Charlie Mead, Chair - WFDF Ultimate Committee </p>

<p>Date: September 1st 2001. </p>

<p><b>Invitation</b> </p>

<p>This is your invitation to submit teams to enter the 2002 WFDF
World Ultimate Club Championships - <b>Honolulu, Hawaii 2002</b>.
The tournament will be held Sunday 4th August-Saturday 10th
August. Registration will be Saturday 3rd August and players will
depart after breakfast on Sunday 11th August. </p>

<p><b>Responsibility of National Associations.</b> </p>

<p>In the table below you will find how many teams each National
Association has been originally allocated to send to WUCC. Each
division has been seeded by country and teams allocated according
to past performances at previous WUCC and WUC tournaments. The
number of teams allocated to each country in each division has
been the subject of discussion and modification within the
Ultimate Committee. The table below is the result of that
deliberation. </p>

<p>Participating organizations must be members of WFDF in good
standing (see http://wfdf.org/wfdfaddr.htm for dues status).</p>

<p>It is the responsibility of each National Association to let
the the Chair of WFDF Ultimate Committee know the following,
using the form at the end of this information. Please reply
electronically only. </p>

<ul>
    <li>How many teams they will enter at WUCC based on their
        allocation for their country in each division </li>
    <li>The contact details of the national association </li>
    <li>All the contact details for teams for each division so
        that they may be contacted directly by WFDF and
        thereafter by the Tournament Director, Grant Wise. All
        general information sent to teams shall be copied to
        National Associations. </li>
    <li>If they do not wish to fill their full allocation so that
        other countries may use their slots. </li>
    <li>If they wish to have more teams enter WUCC than they have
        allocation for. </li>
</ul>

<p>If you are a country on the Reserve list then you should let
the Chair of the Ultimate Committee know: </p>

<ul>
    <li>If you wish to enter a team and for which division </li>
</ul>

<p>If you wish to enter a team in any division and are not
included on the original list or the reserve list then please
contact the Chair of the Ultimate Committee immediately. </p>

<p>NB: Should any division not attract its allocated number of
teams then other divisions may be expanded depending on the
demand for places and the shortfall in the original allocation. </p>

<p><b>The final Deadline for this initial information is December
1st 2001. </b></p>

<p>It is especially important that National Associations return
this information as soon as possible even if they are NOT going
to send any teams. After December 1st the process of offering
spare slots to other teams will begin. </p>

<p>Please return the form at the end of this information to: </p>

<p>E-mail: </p>

<p>charles.mead@easynet.co.uk </p>

<p>Or by surface mail to: </p>

<p>Charlie Mead </p>

<p>67, Cotton Lane, </p>

<p>Birmingham </p>

<p>B13 9SE </p>

<p>England </p>

<p><b>Being offered extra slots for teams</b> </p>

<p>This process will begin after December 1st 2001. For each
division the process is the same. Any National Associations not
confirming their place at WUCC by this date <b>will lose their
allocation. </b>Their allocation will be offered firstly to
National Associations on the Reserve List who have indicated that
they wish to send a team to WUCC. Each Reserve List team in each
division will be offered 1 (one) slot each if they want it. After
this extra slots will be offered to National Associations in the
order they are listed for each division in the table below. That
is, according to their seed. This process will continue until all
slots are full or until the closing date for team registration
which is June 4th 2002, whichever is first. </p>

<p>If a team from a country should withdraw at any time prior to
June 4th 2002 then a team from the next country on the list will
be offered that slot. There will be no automatic replacement of
teams from the same country in these circumstances and penalty
fees will be imposed on teams that withdraw after payment
deadlines have been reached. </p>

<p><b>Teams entering WUCC.</b> </p>

<p>It is the responsibility of all National Associations to
ensure that all teams entering WUCC from their country are aware
of all the rules and regulations regarding eligibility to WUCC.
National Associations are responsible for ensuring that all
rosters are scrutinised and that all players on a team's roster
meet the roster and eligibility guidelines for WUCC. These are
repeated below. </p>

<p>From `WFDF Tournament Directors Manual' </p>

<p>Preliminary rosters for all club teams shall arrive with the
TD, in the format provided by the TD, no later than four(4)
months before the first day of play of the tournament. At this
time teams will be requested to put forward a player fee deposit
of no less than $US 2,500. Players not registered will be subject
to a late penalty fee. This preliminary roster is not valid until
accompanied by the appropriate player fee deposit. </p>

<p>The team roster must be inspected by an official of the
National Flying Disc Association which the club team represents
before being sent to the TD. This official shall countersign the
roster to indicate they have inspected it and found it to be in
accordance with the definition of a club team provided in this
TDM and any other directives provided by the Ultimate Committee. </p>

<p>The rosters shall contain the following information on each
player: </p>

<p>Full name </p>

<p>Shirt number (0-99) </p>

<p>Date of birth </p>

<p>Gender </p>

<p>Permanent address </p>

<p>Nationality </p>

<p>Date of joining the club </p>

<p>Explanations regarding eligibility, where appropriate </p>

<p>Standard passport photograph </p>

<p>The TD is responsible for providing the Chair of the Ultimate
Committee with all team rosters no later than two (2) months
before the first day of play. </p>

<p>If it is necessary to make changes to the preliminary roster,
a final roster for a club team may be submitted by fax or email
to the Chair of the Ultimate Committee (or their designated
representative) no later than fourteen (14) days before the first
day of play. This amended roster may include the names of up to
five (5) players not named in the preliminary roster and must be
countersigned again by an official of the National Flying Disc
Association which the club team represents. No players may be
added to the roster in the final fourteen (14) days before the
start of the tournament nor during the course of the tournament. </p>

<p>A team may withdraw any player from competition at any time up
to the initial payment deadlines. If a team withdrawing players
from competition also adds new players to its roster, the
forfeited player fee for the withdrawn players shall be counted
toward the player fees for the added players. </p>

<p>For a player to be registered to represent a club team it is
necessary that he/she has: </p>

<p>complied with the club team eligibility requirements set out
below, and </p>

<p>paid the player entry fee for the event </p>

<p>The minimum number of players permitted on a roster for teams
is twelve (12). All teams must register at least 12 players for
the start of the tournament. If, during the course of the
tournament, a team is not able to field at least 10 players for a
single game, then the Tournament Rules Group (TRG) may suspend
that team from competition on medical grounds. </p>

<p><b>Definition of a club team</b> </p>

<p><b>For Open, Womens, Mixed and Masters Teams:</b> </p>

<p>A team comprised of players who have not, for the last four
months prior to the WUCC played, competed or entered into
competitive tournaments with any other team. </p>

<p>Teams may have up to three players on their roster who are not
regular members of their team. These individuals must not have
played for any other team entered for WUCC for that year within
four months of the tournament start date. These individuals must
be clearly identified on the Team Roster and their presence
approved by their National Association. </p>

<p>A sports club that is a legally recognised entity operating in
one geographic area and with a membership base large enough to
support more than one competitive team, may enter the tournament
with a single team in each division of its choice, comprised of
players selected from any regularly competing team of the club. </p>

<p>It is the responsibility of National Associations to nominate
bona fide club teams, up to three extra players and exceptions
before the pre-registration roster deadline which may be approved
under the following directives; </p>

<p><b>Exceptions for Open, Womens and Mixed Teams (all exceptions
to apply)</b> </p>

<p>1. Common sense and the spirit of the game should prevail </p>

<p>2. Countries nominating 2 or less teams in any division should
ensure a minimum of 51% of players are regular members of that
team (this includes the three (3) players identified in 2
above)and the remainder of the team must be paid up member
players of other teams and their own National Association. </p>

<p>3. A further exception in this situation is when a player
belongs to both a student team and a different club team. They
may continue to play for both teams prior to WUCC provided that
both teams are not entered for WUCC. (NB: Hat competitions are
not regarded as 'teams') </p>

<p>4. The remainder of the team (maximum 49%)must be
geographically adjacent to the club they wish to play for, not be
closer geographically to any other teams from the same country
entered for WUCC and whose own clubs are not entered in WUCC. </p>

<p>5. Players living in more than one country may play together
as an International Team and waive points two (2) and four (4)
above at the discretion of the Chair of WFDF and the TD of WUCC
2002. </p>

<p><b>Exceptions for Masters Teams</b> </p>

<p>1. Male and Female masters should be 30 years of age during
the year of the tournament. </p>

<p>2. Common sense and the spirit of the game should prevail </p>

<p>3. Countries nominating 2 or less teams should ensure a
minimum of 51% of players are regular members of that team. </p>

<p>4. The remainder of the team must be paid up member players of
other teams and their own National Association. </p>

<p>5. The remainder of the team must be geographically adjacent
to the club they wish to play for, not be closer geographically
to any other teams from the same country entered for WUCC and
whose own clubs are not entered in WUCC in any other division of
the same gender as that player. </p>

<p>6. Players living in more than one country may play together
as an International Team and waive points three (3) and five (5)
above at the discretion of the Chair of WFDF and the TD of WUCC
2002. </p>

<p><b>Exceptions for Mixed Teams</b> </p>

<p>1. Mixed teams must field four players of one gender and three
of the other at all times of play. Mixed teams must have a
minimum of six players of each gender on their roster. </p>

<p>2. Common sense and the spirit of the game should prevail </p>

<p>3. Countries nominating 2 or less teams should ensure a
minimum of 51% of players are regular members of that team. </p>

<p>4. The remainder of the team must be paid up member players of
other teams and their own National Association </p>

<p>5. The remainder of the team must be geographically adjacent
to the club they wish to play for and not be closer
geographically to any other teams from the same country entered
for WUCC. </p>

<p>6. Players living in more than one country may play together
as an International Team and waive points three (3) and five (5)
above at the discretion of the Chair of WFDF and the TD of WUCC
2002. </p>

<p>After the preliminary rosters are due all exceptions to the
definition of a team shall be scrutinised by the Chair of the
Ultimate Committee (or their representative). Exceptions will be
considered on a case by case basis and could, for example,
include the case of a player who currently lives in a different
geographic area but has historically played with the club. </p>

<p>All rosters containing players classified as exceptions
according to the definitions above must include an explanation
for each of these exceptions that describes the particular
circumstances that have made it possible to approve the player on
the roster. </p>

<p>(End of extract). </p>

<p><b>Important Dates</b> </p>

<p>September 1st Invitations to all WFDF Members who are National
Associations. Responses to Chair of WFDF Ultimate Committee.
Information passed to TD. </p>

<p>October 1st Teams are contacted directly by TD as National
Associations nominate them for inclusion in WUCC </p>

<p>December 1st All National Associations MUST have returned
forms indicating the number and names of teams they intend to
send to WUCC. Process of filling all slots begins. This will be
managed directly by Chair of WFDF Ultimate Committee. </p>

<p>April 4th Final payment of team fees due. Penalties after this
date. </p>

<p>June 4th Final payment of player fees due. Penalties after
this date. Team registration closes </p>

<p>June 10th All teams seeded, tournament format finalised and
all games scheduled. </p>

<p>July 19th All team rosters close </p>

<p>August 3rd Teams arrive in Hawaii </p>

<p><b>WFDF World Ultimate Club Championships - Honolulu, Hawaii
2002.</b> </p>

<p><b>Allocation of teams from each National Association</b>
(rev. 9/3/01)</p>

<table border="5" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="5"
bordercolor="#000080">
    <tr>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>Open</b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>40 </b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>Women </b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>24</b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>Mixed</b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>32</b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>Masters </b></td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><b>16</b> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>USA </td>
        <td>4 </td>
        <td>USA</td>
        <td>4</td>
        <td>USA </td>
        <td>4</td>
        <td>USA</td>
        <td>3 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Sweden</td>
        <td>3 </td>
        <td>Japan</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>Canada </td>
        <td>4</td>
        <td>Germany</td>
        <td>2 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Finland</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>GB </td>
        <td>3 </td>
        <td>Japan</td>
        <td>3 </td>
        <td>Australia</td>
        <td>2 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Germany</td>
        <td>3 </td>
        <td>Finland</td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>Finland</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>Canada</td>
        <td>2 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Australia </td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>Sweden</td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Germany </td>
        <td>3 </td>
        <td>Austria</td>
        <td>1 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>GB </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Netherlands </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>GB </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>GB</td>
        <td>1 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Denmark</td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Australia </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Sweden </td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>Switzerland</td>
        <td>1 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Netherlands </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Germany </td>
        <td>1 </td>
        <td>Switzerland </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Italy</td>
        <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Japan</td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>NZ</td>
        <td>1 </td>
        <td>NZ </td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>Japan </td>
        <td>1 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Switzerland</td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Austria </td>
        <td>1 </td>
        <td>Brazil </td>
        <td>1 </td>
        <td>France </td>
        <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>NZ </td>
        <td>2 </td>
        <td>Switzerland</td>
        <td>1 </td>
        <td>Austria </td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Netherlands </td>
        <td>1 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Italy</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Italy</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Czech Rep. </td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Canada</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Canada</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Ireland </td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><strong>Reserve</strong></td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Austria</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Australia</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Sweden</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>France</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><strong>Reserve</strong></td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Mexico</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Finland</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Ireland</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Denmark</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Slovakia</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Belgium</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Belgium</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>France</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Denmark</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>S. Africa</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Belgium</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><strong>Reserve</strong></td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>South Africa</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Russia</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Spain</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Denmark</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>New Zealand</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Spain</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Netherlands</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Taiwan</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Italy</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Hong Kong</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>France</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Venezuela</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Belgium</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Mexico</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>Spain</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0">Reserve</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Brazil</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Czech Rep.</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Slovakia</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Singapore</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Malaysia</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Indonesia</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
        <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p><font color="#FF0000"><b>PLEASE RETURN THIS FORM AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE, AND BY OCTOBER 1ST AT LATEST, EVEN IF YOU DO NOT KNOW
EXACTLY WHICH TEAMS WILL BE ATTENDING. THANK YOU</b></font> </p>

<p><b>WFDF World Ultimate Club Championships - Honolulu, Hawaii
2002.</b> </p>

<p><b>.</b> </p>

<p><b>Registration Form for National Associations</b> </p>

<p>Name of National Association: </p>

<p>Main NA Contact for WUCC: </p>

<p>Address: </p>

<p>Telephone numbers: </p>

<p>E-mail: </p>

<p>Web Site: </p>

<p>I confirm that this national organization is current in its
membership within the World Flying Disc Federation.</p>

<p>I confirm that <b>I shall be sending</b> the following number
of teams to WUCC in each division: </p>

<p>Open Women Masters Mixed </p>

<p>I confirm that I would like to send a team from the <b>Reserve
List</b> in the following divisions </p>

<p>Open Women Masters Mixed </p>

<p>I confirm that I would like to send <b>extra teams</b> to WUCC
in the following divisions: </p>

<p>Open Women Masters Mixed </p>

<p>Please send all contact details of all teams that you will
send or intend to send to WUCC. If you do not know the name and
details of the team please send this form anyway. </p>

<p>This should include: </p>

<p>Team Name: </p>

<p>Main Contact: </p>

<p>Address and telephone numbers: </p>

<p>E-mail address. </p>

<p>(Copy this section for each team you are entering) </p>

<p>The sooner teams are nominated to attend WUCC the sooner they
will receive the full team information on the tournament
including accommodation options, travel arrangements and
tournament conditions. Much of this information will be available
on the HUI2002 website. </p>

<p><b>This proforma should be electronically returned as soon as
possible and by December 1st at the latest. Send to:</b> </p>

<p>Charlie Mead, Chair - WFDF Ultimate Committee </p>

<p><a href="mailto:charles.mead@easynet.co.uk">charles.mead@easynet.co.uk</a>
</p>

<p>or, by surface mail to:</p>

<p>67 Cotton Lane, Birmingham B13 9SE, England </p>
</body>
</html>

