ID=X0658
URL=http://www.akcoach.com/riskmgt.html
SIZE=16322
DATE=12/07/2002
TIME=17:37:03
DATASET=Sport
HTML=<html>

<head>
<title>Risk Management</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 4.0">
<link REL="STYLESHEET" HREF="text.css" type="text/css">

<meta name="Microsoft Border" content="none"></head>

<body>

<h1>Risk Management</h1>

<p>Notice: This article was written by Steve Jordan, <a href="http://www.alaskalife.net/sjordan/notebook/">Coach's
Notebook. </a>Email the author at <a href="mailto:sjordan@alaskalife.net.">sjordan@alaskalife.net.</a></p>

<h2>Evaluating Decisions through Risk Management</h2>

<p>The secret to making consistent, productive decisions on the court is
to understand the risks involved behind each action. As in regular life, every action
taken on the court has a consequence. The winner of the game is determined by the sum of
all the positive/negative consequences incurred by each team. The important thing for
players to learn is that they have endless choices to make while they are on the floor. If
they will acknowledge that there are risks with each choice, and that one must assume a
risk to gain something worthwhile (like a basket!) it is usually pretty easy to recognize
the most rewarding consequence. The concept I like to use from the business world is <strong>Risk
Management</strong>. Its not necessary to keep a head full of percentages and statistics,
either.</p>

<p>For illustrative purposes, imagine a player with the ball on the perimeter who has 1) a
questionable opening to take a 3 point shot; 2) a open, casually guarded player in the
corner; 3) a well-defended player in the high post position calling for the ball; 4) a
player open in the point guard spot, and 5) a low post player who is behind enemy lines
but hidden from the ballhandler. The choices ranked from high risk to low risk are: 

<ol>
  <li>Pass to the low post player. Risk is high due to 3 defenders in passing lane. Payoff for
    successful pass is easy 2 pt shot. (0.02)<br>
  </li>
  <li>Pass to the high post player. Risk moderate, but payoff is a difficult shot or a pass
    back outside - no gain.<br>
  </li>
  <li>Pass to man in corner. Risk is low but payoff is a difficult shot or a pass back outside
    - no gain<br>
  </li>
  <li>Shoot the ball. Risk is high. Potential success mitigated by defensive coverage
    (questionable opening). Possible payoff is 3 points.<br>
  </li>
  <li>Pass to point guard. Risk is low and point guard has visibility to low post player.
    Payoff is easy 2 pt shot.</li>
</ol>

<p>If you like playing with numbers, you can assign values to the risks and payoffs and
determine possible payoff value (pass risk*FG%*pts). <strong>Note: it would be ridiculous
for a player to try and calculate odds during a basketball game</strong>. The pace is much
too quick. But it is valuable to analyze these situations in practice so the players
understand that it makes a difference what they decide to do. Once the concept is
instilled, players can make judgements that more complex and meaningful than any formulae
can convey. With experience, reactions to common situations become instinctive. With
understanding, players reach the level of instinctive behavior much more quickly than they
would through trial and error.</p>

<p>Here is a simple table showing arbitrary values for each action in the example above.
In this case, rerouting the ball through the point guard to the low post player has the
highest potential payoff. Of course, as soon as you explain this, a kid will throw a high,
arcing pass over the defense to the low post player who then makes a nice tip in. Does
that instance prove the risk management concept wrong? No, not if you play the odds over
the course of the season. If this scenario is repeated 100 times, option 5 isn't just
better, it is dramatically better (128 points vs 60...). Or you could settle for 18 points
with the risky pass that wowed the crowd 9 times and turned the ball over to the other
team 91 times.</p>
<div align="left">

<table border="0" width="420" cellspacing="0" style="margin-left: 20px">
  <caption><em><small><font face="Arial">The percentages represent the action's estimated
  chances of success</font></small></em></caption>
  <tr>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">Option</font></small></th>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">1st
    Pass</font></small></th>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">2nd
    Pass</font></small></th>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">Shot</font></small></th>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">Points</font></small></th>
    <th valign="middle" align="center" width="70" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial">Value</font></small></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">1</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">10%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">na</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">90%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">2</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">.18</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">2</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">65%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">na</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">30%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">2</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">.39</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">3</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">90%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">na</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">30%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">2</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">.54</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">4</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">na</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">na</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">20%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">3</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">.60</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">5</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">95%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">75%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">90%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">2</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">1.28</font></small></td>
  </tr>
</table>
</div>

<h2>Factor Failure into Expectations</h2>

<p>While one should strive to make all shots, 100% is not an achievable
goal. Players miss shots, that's a fact of life. Passes have a risk factor as well.
Sometimes easy passes are just mishandled. Sometimes unguarded dribblers bounce the ball
of their foot. The point is, a coach must plan for and expect players to fail once in a
while. Expecting players to make every lay-up, for instance, and yelling at the shooter
who misses a lay-up in the game is like preparing your budget by only listing expected
income and then being shocked and upset when the bills come in.</p>

<p>Demonstrating emotional displays of disappointment when players don't execute a common
play only serves to make the player hesitant to try a second time. Once players become
&quot;risk-adverse&quot; because the consequences of failure are too great, the game is no
longer fun and impossible to win. Its much more fun to take a chance, to try and create an
opportunity and enjoy the reward when it is earned.</p>

<p><strong>TIP:&nbsp;</strong>The coach's job is to help the players reduce errors through
education and refinement of skills. In practice, encourage the players to seek perfection
in performing simple tasks, such as screens, cuts, lay-ups. In shooting drills, have the
players see how many shots can be made in a row. If players are missing shots because of
lack of concentration or improper execution, focus criticism and corrective measures on
those causes.</p>

<h2>Tools to Measure Success</h2>

<p>The coaching staff should use different tools to measure the success
of their team. The ultimate statistic is the team's win/loss percentage because the
objective of the game is to win. However, it is true that winning covers up many faults.
As long as the team is winning, no one usually cares about the process and there is little
motivation to correct deficiencies. Ultimately, those deficiencies will be exposed,
generally by the test of tougher competition. If a team is in a league that offers little
competition, you can expect the team's performance to gradually erode to the level of the
opponents, and then the deficiencies will surface. So, it is beneficial to look past the
win/loss column to improve the team. The best tool I know of is the video tape. If the
players are mature enough and you have the facility, show them the game tapes and explain
what you see. It is difficult to describe certain situations to players, whereas they can
see it plainly on the television set.</p>

<p>The next best tool is a shot chart that indicates by player number, where a shot was
taken, and if it was made (circle the player number). At the end of a half, trends are
sometimes vivid on paper but oblivious to the players. For example, the shot chart may
show that 20 three point attempts were taken, but only three were made (15%). Meanwhile,
your opponent didn't take any 3-point shots, and instead made 50% of their twenty 2-point
shots. If you compare those 20 possessions, our team was scoring .45 points per possession
while the opponent scored 1 point per possession, or a total of 9 points versus 20. The
shot chart can also illustrate where on the floor the team is particular effective or
ineffective and can help dictate a defensive change.</p>

<h2>Basketball is Money</h2>

<p>The game plan is similar to preparing a budget where expenses and
income are planned, only in basketball the idea is to accumulate points instead of
dollars. Lets assume a free throw is worth $1, a field goal $2 and a three point basket
$3, and we get paid every time we make a shot. Lets also pick a standard to strive for,
like we want to make $1 every time we have the ball. Is that possible? Sure. In an average
high school game, each team has the ball about 80 times. Each team will take about 60
shots (remember to account for turnovers and offensive rebounds). If we hit 33% of the
threes, 60% of the twos and about 75% of the free throws, we'll end up with about 80
points, or a buck a possession. Here's a sample table to demonstrate the factors.</p>
<div align="left">

<table border="0" width="420" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" style="margin-left: 20px">
  <tr>
    <td bgcolor="#C0C0C0"></td>
    <td align="center" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial"><strong>Qty</strong></font></small></td>
    <td align="center" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial"><strong>Pct</strong></font></small></td>
    <td align="center" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial"><strong>Pts</strong></font></small></td>
    <td align="left" bgcolor="#C0C0C0"><small><font face="Arial"><strong>Comments</strong></font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">Possessions</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">80</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="left"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">Offensive Rebounds</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">10</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="left"><small><font face="Arial">Gains a shot</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">Turnovers</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">15</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="left"><small><font face="Arial">Costs a shot</font></small></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">3pt shots</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">12</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">33%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">12</font></small></td>
    <td align="left"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">2pt Shots</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">48</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">60%</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial">58</font></small></td>
    <td align="left"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><small><font face="Arial">Free Throws</font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial"><u>15</u></font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial"><u>75%</u></font></small></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial"><u>11</u></font></small></td>
    <td align="left"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
    <td align="center"><small><font face="Arial"><strong>81</strong></font></small></td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
</table>
</div>

<p>Now we can calculate values for many of the things players do to help their team win.
Just grabbed a defensive rebound? That's like a dollar in the bank we can go invest in a
shot attempt. Knowing that possession has a value, are we going to waste it on a high risk
shot or a lazy pass?</p>

<p>Got fouled and going to the line for two shots? Expected value is $1.50 (two chances at
a dollar x 75% probability). If you need to foul the other team at the end of the game,
these values are very important because each time you foul them, they get points. They
might miss a 1:1 the first time but make both shots the next time. In the long run they
will get their 75 cents per free throw. That means that if you must overcome a 6 point
lead, you better start fouling early because each possession you are exchanging 75cents
for them on the free throws for a dollar at your end (assuming you're making at least 50%
of your twos and 33% of your threes!). As the game winds down, the situation is much more
desperate. The losing team is soon into a situation where they must make all their
remaining shots and the winning team must miss most of their free throws in order for the
trailing team to prevail. Its like a gambler who is losing at roulette finally placing all
his remaining money on his favorite number and hoping he hits the long shot, then turning
around and doing it again just to get even. Its possible he'll luck out, but not likely.</p>

<p>It is important for the players to feel that possession of the basketball has a value.
The player with the ball is the caretaker and has a special responsibility to the team.
Everyone on the team is let down if the ball is carelessly turned over to the opponent.
Everyone on the team has made an investment in that possession by working hard on defense,
getting a rebound or making a steal.</p>
<!--webbot bot="HitCounter" u-custom i-digits="0" i-image="3" PREVIEW="&lt;strong&gt;[Hit Counter]&lt;/strong&gt;" i-resetvalue="0" startspan --><img SRC="_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/?Page=riskmgt.html|Image=3" ALT="Hit Counter"><!--webbot bot="HitCounter" endspan i-checksum="10596" -->
</body>
</html>

